EBA/GL/2025/01
08/01/2025

Final Report
Guidelines on the management of environmental, social and
governance (ESG) risks

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Contents
1.

Executive Summary

3

2.

Background and rationale

4

3.

Guidelines

13

4.

Reference methodology for the identification and measurement of ESG risks

18

5.

Minimum standards and reference methodology for the management and monitoring of
ESG risks
27

6.

Plans in accordance with Article 76(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU

38

7.

Accompanying documents

46

2

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

1. Executive Summary
The EBA is mandated in accordance with Article 87a(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU to issue guidelines
on minimum standards and reference methodologies for the identification, measurement,
management and monitoring of environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks by institutions.
ESG risks, in particular environmental risks through transition and physical risk drivers, pose
challenges to the safety and soundness of institutions and may affect all traditional categories of
financial risks to which they are exposed. To ensure the resilience of the business model and risk
profile of institutions in the short, medium and long term, the guidelines set requirements for the
internal processes and ESG risk management arrangements that institutions should have in place.
Institutions, based on regular and comprehensive materiality assessments of ESG risks, should
ensure that they are able to properly identify and measure ESG risks through sound data processes
and a combination of methodologies, including exposure-, portfolio- and sector-based, portfolio
alignment and scenario-based methodologies.
Institutions should integrate ESG risks into their regular risk management framework by considering
their role as potential drivers of all traditional categories of financial risks, including credit, market,
operational, reputational, liquidity, business model, and concentration risks. Institutions should
have a robust and sound approach to managing and mitigating ESG risks over the short, medium
and long term, including a time horizon of at least 10 years, and should apply a range of risk
management tools including engagement with counterparties. Institutions should embed ESG risks
in their regular processes including in the risk appetite, internal controls and ICAAP. Besides,
institutions should monitor ESG risks through effective internal reporting frameworks and a range
of backward- and forward-looking ESG risk metrics and indicators.
Institutions should develop specific plans to address the risks arising from the transition and process
of adjustment of the economy towards the regulatory objectives related to ESG factors of the
jurisdictions they operate in. To this end, institutions should assess and embed forward-looking ESG
risk considerations in their strategies, policies and risk management processes through transition
planning considering short-, medium- and long-term time horizons. CRD-based plans take a riskbased view and contribute to the overall resilience of institutions towards ESG risks and should be
consistent with transition plans prepared or disclosed by institutions under other pieces of EU
legislation.

Next steps
The guidelines will apply from 11 January 2026 except for small and non-complex institutions for
which the guidelines will apply at the latest from 11 January 2027.
3

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

2. Background and rationale
2.1 Impact of ESG risks
1. Climate change, environmental degradation, biodiversity loss, social issues and other
environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors pose considerable challenges for the
economy. The impact of acute and chronic physical risk events, the need to transition to a
low-carbon, resource-efficient and sustainable economy, as well as other ESG challenges, are
causing and will continue to cause profound economic transformations that impact the
financial sector.
2. The Commission’s Renewed Sustainable Finance Strategy and the banking package (Directive
2013/36/EU (Capital Requirements Directive, CRD) and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (Capital
Requirements Regulation, CRR)) recognise that the financial sector has an important role to
play both in terms of supporting the transition towards a climate-neutral and sustainable
economy, as enshrined in the Paris Agreement, the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the European Green Deal, and for managing the financial risks
that this transition may entail and/or those stemming from other ESG factors.
3. Environmental risks, including climate-related risks, are expected inter alia to become even
more prominent going forward through different possible combinations of transition and
physical risks. These may affect all traditional categories of financial risks to which institutions
are exposed. In addition, institutions’ counterparties or invested assets may be subject to the
negative impact of social factors, such as breaches of human rights, demographic change,
digitalisation, health or working conditions, and governance factors, such as shortcomings in
executive leadership or bribery and corruption, which may in turn lead to financial risks that
institutions should assess and manage.
4. To maintain adequate resilience to the negative impacts of ESG factors, institutions
established in the EU need to be able to systematically identify, measure and manage ESG
risks. However, the specificities of ESG risks such as their forward-looking nature and distinct
impacts over various time horizons, as well as the lack of relevant historical experience, means
that understanding, measurement and management practices can differ significantly across
institutions. The EBA’s observations stemming from the monitoring of supervisory colleges,
as well as supervisory experience from competent authorities, also show that the
management of ESG risks is still at an early stage and ‘work in progress’, with only nascent
practices on ESG risks other than climate-related risks in most EU institutions. Despite action
taken in recent years, several shortcomings have been observed in the inclusion of ESG risks
in business strategies and risk management frameworks that may pose challenges to the
safety and soundness of institutions as the EU transitions towards a more sustainable
economy and the materialisation of ESG risks intensifies.
4

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

2.2 Legal mandate and objective of these guidelines
5. To enhance the prudential framework’s focus on ESG risks faced by institutions, new
provisions have been introduced and adjustments have been made to several Articles in the
CRD and in the CRR. In particular and to ensure a uniform understanding of ESG risks,
definitions of ESG risks, environmental risk, physical risk, transition risk, social risk and
governance risk have been laid down in Article 4 of the CRR. Articles 73 and 74 of the CRD
have been amended to require that short-, medium- and long-term horizons of ESG risks be
included in credit institutions’ strategies and processes for evaluating internal capital needs
as well as adequate internal governance. A reference to the current and forward-looking
impacts of ESG risks and a request for the management body to develop concrete plans to
address these risks have also been introduced in Article 76 of the CRD.
6. In addition, a new Article 87a has been included in the CRD, according to which:
1. Competent authorities shall ensure that institutions have, as part of their robust
governance arrangements including risk management framework required under
Article 74(1), robust strategies, policies, processes and systems for the
identification, measurement, management and monitoring of ESG risks over the
short, medium and long term.
2. The strategies, policies, processes and systems referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
proportionate to the scale, nature and complexity of the ESG risks of the business
model and scope of the institution’s activities, and consider the short and medium
term, and a long-term time horizon of at least 10 years.
3. Competent authorities shall ensure that institutions test their resilience to longterm negative impacts of ESG factors, both under baseline and adverse scenarios
within a given timeframe, starting with climate-related factors. For such resilience
testing, competent authorities shall ensure that institutions include a number of
ESG scenarios reflecting potential impacts of environmental and social changes and
associated public policies on the long-term business environment. Competent
authorities shall ensure that in the resilience testing process, institutions use
credible scenarios, based on the scenarios elaborated by international
organisations.
4. Competent authorities shall assess and monitor developments of institutions’
practices concerning their ESG strategy and risk management, including the plans,
quantifiable targets and processes to monitor and address the ESG risks arising in
the short, medium and long-term, to be prepared in accordance with Article 76(2).
This assessment shall take into account the institutions’ sustainability-related
product offering, their transition finance policies, related loan origination policies,
and ESG-related targets and limits. Competent authorities shall assess the
robustness of those plans as part of the supervisory review and evaluation process.
5

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Where relevant, for the assessment referred to in the first subparagraph,
competent authorities may cooperate with authorities or public bodies in charge
of climate change and environmental supervision.
7. To foster robust risk management practices and ensure convergence across the Union, the
EBA has been empowered in Article 87a(5) of the CRD to issue guidelines to specify:
a) minimum standards and reference methodologies for the identification, measurement,
management and monitoring of ESG risks;
b) the content of plans to be prepared in accordance with Article 76(2) of the CRD, which
shall include specific timelines and intermediate quantifiable targets and milestones, in
order to monitor and address the financial risks stemming from ESG factors, including
those arising from the process of adjustment and transition trends towards the relevant
Member States and Union regulatory objectives in relation to ESG factors, in particular
the objective to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 as set out in Regulation (EU)
2021/1119, as well as, where relevant for internationally active institutions, thirdcountry legal and regulatory objectives;
c) qualitative and quantitative criteria for the assessment of the impact of ESG risks on the
risk profile and solvency of institutions in the short, medium and long term;
d) criteria for setting the scenarios referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 87a of the CRD,
including the parameters and assumptions to be used in each of the scenarios, specific
risks and time horizons.
8. These guidelines address the aspects included in points a), b) and c) of the mandate entrusted
to the EBA. Point d) of the mandate will be addressed through the development of
complementary guidelines on scenario analysis related to ESG factors. Therefore, these
guidelines on the management of ESG risks only include a broad requirement for institutions
to perform scenario-based analyses, which will be further specified by the future guidelines
on scenario analysis.
9. These guidelines aim at enhancing the identification, measurement, management and
monitoring of ESG risks by institutions, as referred to under Article 4(1) point 3 of Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013, and at supporting their safety and soundness as they are confronted with
the short-, medium- and long-term impact of ESG factors. The guidelines contain
requirements as to the internal processes and ESG risk management arrangements that
institutions should have in place, including specific plans to address the risks arising from the
transition and process of adjustment to relevant sustainability legal and regulatory objectives.
10. The guidelines include minimum reference methodologies to be developed and used by
institutions to assess ESG risks. Acknowledging the continuous progress in the availability and
development of ESG risk data and methodologies, the focus is on the main features of key
6

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

types of methodologies, whilst flexibility is left to institutions regarding specific details, also
to facilitate the development of institutions’ own methodologies over time.

2.3 Plans to monitor and address ESG risks
11. The long-term nature and the profoundness of the transition process towards a climateneutral and sustainable economy may entail significant changes in the business models of
institutions and in the types and levels of risks they are confronted with. As a result, according
to Article 76(2) of the CRD, institutions shall set out specific plans to monitor and address the
financial risks arising from ESG factors, including those arising from the transition and process
of adjustment to the relevant Member States and Union regulatory objectives in relation to
ESG factors, as well as, where relevant for internationally active institutions, third-country
objectives.
12. These guidelines specify requirements for CRD-based plans and are focused on risk-based
transition planning from a micro prudential perspective. Their objective is to ensure that
institutions comprehensively assess and embed forward-looking ESG risk considerations in
their strategies, policies and risk management processes, including by taking a long-term
perspective and with a view to ensuring their soundness and resilience to the risks faced.
13. Whilst based on the prudential framework for banks, these guidelines and especially Section
6 and the Annex have been prepared by taking into consideration other initiatives and
legislative frameworks related to plans, commonly called transition plans, that should be
disclosed and/or developed by sets of non-financial and financial corporates to ensure that
their business model and strategy are compatible with the transition. These include the
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) 1 , the Corporate Sustainability Due
Diligence Directive (CSDDD)2, and the European Commission’s (EC) Recommendation of June
2023 on facilitating finance for the transition to a sustainable economy3 as well as, where
relevant, other international public or private initiatives.
14. The requirements related to plans that are included under various pieces of EU legislation
have specific but complementary purposes and should be addressed by institutions that are
in the scope of these requirements in a coherent and consistent manner. Notably, CSRD and
CSDDD include requirements for the disclosure and adoption, respectively, of plans to ensure
the compatibility of business models of undertakings with the transition to a sustainable
economy and with the limiting of global warming to 1.5°C in line with the Paris Agreement
and the objective of the EU to achieve climate neutrality by 2050. CSRD aims at providing
transparency to investors and other stakeholders. CRD and these guidelines include
1

Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 amending Regulation
(EU) No 537/2014, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 2013/34/EU, as regards corporate
sustainability reporting.
2
Directive (EU) 2024/1760 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 on corporate sustainability
due diligence and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937 and Regulation (EU) 2023/2859.
3
Commission Recommendation (EU) 2023/1425 of 27 June 2023 on facilitating finance for the transition to a sustainable
economy - https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32023H1425

7

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

requirements for the monitoring and management of financial risks stemming from ESG
factors, including those arising from the transition towards a climate-neutral and more
sustainable economy, and therefore have a deeper focus on risk assessment and
management. Plans required under CRD as specified by these guidelines are not subject to
disclosure, although some parts may be covered by transparency requirements of CSRD
and/or Pillar 3, but will be assessed by prudential supervisors of institutions as part of the
supervisory review and evaluation process.
15. Whilst these guidelines are focused on the prudential aspects of transition planning, the EBA
emphasises that institutions will need to develop a single, comprehensive strategic planning
process that covers all regulatory requirements stemming from applicable legislation (also
beyond the strictly prudential, i.e. including CSRD, CSDDD, sectoral legislation, etc.) and all
relevant aspects, including inter alia business strategy, risk management, due diligence, and
sustainability reporting. Such an integrated, holistic internal approach should ensure
consistent outcomes when addressing all applicable requirements, the coordination of all
efforts related to transition planning within institutions, the operationalisation of strategic
climate targets and commitments, a reduced administrative burden, and the development of
risk management arrangements commensurate with the strategies followed by institutions.
In particular, an institution that carries out its sustainability reporting in accordance with
Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive4 should ensure consistency of information
used to comply with these guidelines and information disclosed in accordance with the
European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) and rely on the already available
materially identical or significantly comparable relevant information to the extent possible.
16. These guidelines do not require CRD-based plans to set out an objective of fully aligning with
Member States or Union sustainability objectives or one specific transition trajectory. At the
same time, it must be noted that plans developed by institutions to monitor and address ESG
risks in accordance with the CRD also need to consider and ensure consistency with
institutions’ voluntary commitments and other requirements stemming from non-prudential
regulations. Such consistency is explicitly required under Article 87a(5) subparagraph 2 of the
CRD which states that, where relevant, the methodologies and assumptions sustaining the
targets, the commitments and the strategic decisions disclosed publicly by institutions under
the Accounting Directive, or other relevant disclosure and due diligence frameworks, shall be
consistent with the criteria, methodologies, assumptions, and targets used in the plans to be
prepared in accordance with the CRD.
17. In addition, while these guidelines do not prescribe any particular business strategy,
institutions need to assess financial risks stemming from misalignments of their portfolios
with relevant EU regulatory objectives towards a sustainable economy, including the climate

4

Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements,
consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings

8

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

targets for 2030 and 2050 included in the European Climate Law5, namely the reduction by
2030 of greenhouse gas emissions levels by 55% compared to 1990, and achieving net-zero
emissions by 2050. From a risk management perspective, institutions therefore need to
understand the potential implications for their business models of the transition process and
of the broader EU legislative framework and develop a strategic response to manage the risks
associated with these developments as part of a unified internal transition planning exercise.
18. It should also be pointed out that the goal of CRD-based plans is not to force institutions to
exit or divest from greenhouse gas-intensive sectors but rather to stimulate institutions to
proactively reflect on technological, business and behavioural changes driven by the
transition, to thoroughly assess the risks and opportunities they entail, and to prepare or
adapt accordingly through structured transition planning, including by engaging with their
clients and supporting them where appropriate, notwithstanding other mitigation actions
consistent with sound risk management.
19. Moreover, CRD-based plans are closely related to the policy proposals included in the EBA
report on the management and supervision of ESG risks6, which recommended institutions to
integrate ESG risks into their processes, including by extending the time horizon for strategic
planning to at least 10 years, at least qualitatively, and by testing their resilience to different
scenarios.
20. Against this background, CRD-based plans can be understood as the overview and articulation
of the strategic actions and risk management tools deployed by institutions, based on a
forward-looking business environment analysis and a single, comprehensive transition
planning process, to demonstrate how an institution ensures its robustness and preparedness
for the transition towards a climate and environmentally resilient and more sustainable
economy. These plans aim at ensuring that institutions identify, measure, manage and
monitor ESG risks, in particular environmental transition and physical risks, over several time
horizons including long-time horizons while also setting targets and milestones at regular time
intervals. Such plans should be embedded in the institutions’ strategy and risk management
and address the risks arising from the structural changes that may occur within the industries
and counterparties to which institutions are exposed, taking into account the transition
pathways and adaptation frameworks compatible with the legal and regulatory objectives of
the Member States, EU, and where relevant, other jurisdictions in which they operate.
21. These guidelines refer to transition planning as the internal strategic and risk management
process undertaken by institutions to prepare for risks and potential changes in their business
model associated with a transition to an environmentally resilient and more sustainable
economy, including the implementation of their objectives and targets for monitoring and
addressing ESG risks. The plans are in turn the outputs of the transition planning process.
5

Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework
for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate
Law’)
6
EBA Report on management and supervision of ESG risks for credit institutions and investment firms (EBA/REP/2021/18)

9

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

22. Acknowledging the fast-evolving developments related to transition plans and the need to
preserve the responsibility of the management bodies to set the overall business strategies
and policies, these guidelines focus on processes, principles, core expectations and main
features, including metrics, of sound plans for the management of ESG risks, while leaving
flexibility and responsibility to institutions as to the specific details and levels of targets. The
Annex provides guidance on how institutions could structure the presentation of their plans
in line with the requirements established in the guidelines, while not introducing additional
requirements nor intending to be exhaustive.

2.4 Proportionality
23. The guidelines have been drafted taking into account the proportionality principle set out in
Article 87a(2) of the CRD (see paragraph 6 above). This means that proportionality should
firstly be understood as driven by the materiality of ESG risks associated with the institution’s
activities and business model. As such, these guidelines establish in Section 4.1 that
institutions should rely on the results of their materiality assessments of ESG risks to design
and implement proportionate strategies, policies, processes and plans.
24. In addition, since these guidelines cover internal governance and risk management
arrangements of institutions, they apply in accordance with the general principle of
proportionality applicable to internal governance and risk management arrangements of all
institutions, as laid out in Title I of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance7.
25. The size of institutions is not a sufficient criterion to apply proportionality with regard to the
management of ESG risks. Smaller institutions are not immune to ESG risks, for example in
case of concentrations of exposures in ESG-sensitive economic sectors or in geographical
areas prone to physical risks. All institutions should therefore implement approaches that are
commensurate with the results of their materiality assessment and that ensure their ability
to manage ESG risks in a safe and prudent manner.
26. However, the size and complexity of institutions do play a role in the level of available
resources and capacities to manage ESG risks. These guidelines therefore provide some
differentiated provisions for small and non-complex institutions (SNCIs) as well as for other
non-large institutions, where appropriate, allowing them to implement less complex or
sophisticated arrangements. On the other hand, these guidelines include some more
extensive requirements for large institutions8.
27. Concretely, the specific provisions included in these guidelines for SNCIs and other non-large
institutions relate to the frequency of updates of the materiality assessment (see paragraph
11 of the guidelines), the extent to which qualitative considerations and/or estimates and
proxies can be used (see e.g., paragraph 15 of the guidelines), the number and granularity of
risk assessment methodologies (see section 4.2.3) and monitoring metrics (see paragraph 81)
7
EBA Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2021/05)
8

Definitions of SNCI and large institution provided in Article 4(1)(145) and Article 4(1)(146) of the CRR, respectively, apply.

10

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

as well as certain aspects of CRD-based plans such as their granularity (paragraph 110), update
frequency (paragraph 114), scenarios (paragraph 97) and metrics (paragraph 106).
28. With regard to CRD-based plans, Article 76(2) of the CRD allows Member States to indicate in
what areas a waiver or a simplified procedure may be applied by SNCIs. Section 6 of these
guidelines already provides proportionality measures for SNCIs and other non-large
institutions which apply even in cases where Member States do not make use of the
mentioned CRD provision. If a Member State decides to apply the provision, Section 6 of these
guidelines will apply to SNCIs dependent on the transposition of CRD into national law.

2.5 Environmental risks and ESG risks
29. As reflected in the CRD provisions, and in line with the sequenced approach adopted under
other EBA regulatory products on ESG risks such as the Implementing Technical Standards on
Pillar 3 disclosures, these guidelines put emphasis on environmental risks while still containing
some minimum requirements on the remaining categories of ESG risks.
30. Although currently institutions are typically more advanced as regards the measurement and
assessment of climate-related risks, it is important that institutions progressively develop
tools and practices that aim at assessing and managing the impacts of a sufficiently
comprehensive range of environmental risks, as defined in Article 4(1)(52e) of the CRR,
extending beyond merely climate-related risks to also include broader environmental risks
such as risks stemming from the degradation of ecosystems and biodiversity loss, as well as
from other ESG factors9. Given the widespread dependence of economic activities on nature,
it is particularly relevant that institutions properly understand the potential physical and
transition risks that could result from nature degradation and from actions aimed at
protecting and restoring it.
31. In addition, it should be kept in mind that institutions can be both impacted by (so-called
‘financial materiality’) and have an impact on (so-called ‘environmental and social
materiality’) environmental and social factors through their core business activities, i.e. their
lending to counterparties and their investments in assets. On the financial materiality side,
the economic and financial activities of counterparties or invested assets can be negatively
impacted by environmental or social factors, which might affect the value and risk profile of
such activities and in turn translate into a financial impact on the institution. On the
environmental and social materiality side, the economic and financial activities of
counterparties or invested assets can have a negative impact on environmental and social
factors, which could in turn translate into a direct financial impact on the institution or affect
it through reputational, litigation or business model risks. The assessment and management
of environmental and social risks should take both of these dimensions into account to the
extent that they affect the financial risks to which institutions are exposed.
9

Annex 1 of EBA Report on management and supervision of ESG risks provides a non-exhaustive list of ESG factors
(EBA/REP/2021/18)

11

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

2.6 Articulation with international developments and other EBA
products
32. These guidelines build on existing EU and international requirements and/or principles on the
management of ESG risks, such as the BCBS principles for the effective management and
supervision of climate-related financial risks 10 . They also take into account the analysis
performed and recommendations included in the EBA Report on the management and
supervision of ESG risks, guidance published by supervisors or networks of central banks such
as the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), various initiatives related to
transition planning and plans 11 as well as supervisory experience regarding institutions’
practices on the management of climate and environmental risks.
33. These guidelines are consistent with and include cross-references to other EBA guidelines or
standards which refer to ESG risks, such as the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and
monitoring (with respect to integration of ESG risks in credit risk policies), the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance (with respect to integration of ESG risks in governance arrangements),
and the EBA Implementing Technical Standards on Pillar 3 disclosure of ESG risks (with respect
to ESG risk metrics). In addition, based on the recent amendments to the CRD, the EBA will
introduce or incorporate further ESG risk considerations when developing future guidelines
on scenario analysis and when updating its guidelines on internal governance, guidelines on
fit-and-proper assessments and guidelines on remuneration policies. These future
developments and updates will be done in a way that ensures consistency with these
guidelines on the management of ESG risks, complementing them in specific areas such as
scenario analysis, the responsibilities of the management body or the integration of ESG risks
into institutions’ remuneration frameworks.
34. These guidelines are part of the EBA’s mandates and tasks in the area of sustainable finance
and ESG risks which cover the three pillars of the prudential framework for banks as well as
other areas related to sustainable finance and the assessment and monitoring of ESG risks, as
laid out in the EBA’s roadmap on sustainable finance12.

10

BCBS Principles for the effective management and supervision of climate-related financial risks
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d532.htm
11
Non-exhaustive examples include publications by the NGFS, EU Platform on Sustainable Finance, UK Transition Plan
Taskforce, Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures.
12
EBA roadmap on sustainable finance

12

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

3. Guidelines

13

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

EBA/GL/2025/01
08/01/2025

Guidelines on the management of
environmental, social and governance
(ESG) risks

14

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

1. Compliance and reporting
obligations
Status of these guidelines
1. This document contains guidelines issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No
1093/20101. In accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent
authorities and financial institutions must make every effort to comply with the guidelines.
2. Guidelines set the EBA view of appropriate supervisory practices within the European System
of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area. Competent
authorities as defined in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 to whom guidelines
apply should comply by incorporating them into their practices as appropriate (e.g. by
amending their legal framework or their supervisory processes), including where guidelines
are directed primarily at institutions.

Reporting requirements
3. According to Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authorities must
notify the EBA as to whether they comply or intend to comply with these guidelines, or
otherwise with reasons for non-compliance, by [dd.mm.yyyy]. In the absence of any
notification by this deadline, competent authorities will be considered by the EBA to be noncompliant. Notifications should be sent by submitting the form available on the EBA website
with the reference ‘EBA/GL/2025/01’. Notifications should be submitted by persons with
appropriate authority to report compliance on behalf of their competent authorities. Any
change in the status of compliance must also be reported to EBA.
4. Notifications will be published on the EBA website, in line with Article 16(3).

1

Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC, (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p.12).

15

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

2. Subject matter, scope and definitions
Subject matter and scope of application
5. These guidelines specify robust governance arrangements institutions need to have in place
in accordance with Articles 87a(1) and 74 of Directive 2013/36/EU 2, and cover:
1

(a) minimum standards and reference methodologies for the identification, measurement,
management and monitoring of environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks, in
accordance with Article 87a(5)a) of that Directive;
(b) qualitative and quantitative criteria for the assessment of the impact of ESG risks on the
risk profile and solvency of institutions in the short, medium and long term, in accordance
with Article 87a(5)c) of that Directive;
(c) the content of plans to be prepared in accordance with Article 76(2) of that Directive by
the management body, which shall include specific timelines and intermediate quantifiable
targets and milestones, in order to monitor and address the financial risks stemming from
ESG factors, including those arising from the process of adjustment and transition trends
towards the relevant Member States and Union regulatory objectives in relation to ESG
factors, in particular the objective to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 as set out in
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119, as well as, where relevant for international active institutions,
third country legal and regulatory objectives, in accordance with Article 87a(5)b) of that
Directive.
6. These guidelines address the ESG risk management processes of institutions as part of their
broader risk management framework. They apply in relation to the robust strategies, policies,
processes and systems for the identification, measurement, management and monitoring of
ESG risks over the short, medium and long term that institutions subject to Directive
2013/36/EU shall have as part of their robust governance arrangements including risk
management framework required under Article 74(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU. These
guidelines also complement and further specify EBA Guidelines on internal governance3 and
EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring4 in relation to the management of ESG
risks.
7. Competent authorities and institutions should apply these guidelines in accordance with the
level of application set out in Article 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU.

1

2

Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC
and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338).
3
EBA Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2021/05)
4
EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring (EBA/GL/2020/06)

16

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Addressees
8. These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities as defined in Article 4(2) point (i) of
Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 and to financial institutions as defined in Article 4(1) of
Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 which are also institutions in accordance with Article 4(1) point
3 of Regulation (EU) No 575/20135.

Definitions
9. Unless otherwise specified, terms used and defined in Directive 2013/36/EU and Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013 have the same meaning in these guidelines.

3. Implementation
Date of application
10. These guidelines apply to institutions other than small and non-complex institutions from
11 January 2026. These guidelines apply to small and non-complex institutions at the latest
from 11 January 2027.

5

Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential
requirements for credit institutions and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.06.2013, p. 1).

17

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

4. Reference methodology for the
identification and measurement of ESG
risks
4.1 Materiality assessment
11. As part of the reference methodology for institutions’ identification and measurement of ESG
risks to be included in their strategies and internal procedures, institutions should provide for
the regular performance of a materiality assessment of ESG risks. That assessment should be
performed at least every year or, for small and non-complex institutions (SNCIs), every two
years. Institutions including SNCIs should, however, update their assessment more frequently
in case of a material change to their business environment related to ESG factors, such as
significant new public policies or shifts in the institution’s business model, portfolios or operations.
12. The materiality assessment of ESG risks should be performed as an institution-specific assessment which provides the institution with a view on the financial materiality of ESG risks for its
business model and risk profile, supported by a mapping of ESG factors and transmission
channels to traditional financial risk categories. The materiality assessment of ESG risks should
be consistent with other materiality assessments conducted by the institution, in particular
those made for the purpose of disclosing material sustainability risks in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU6 and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/27727, where applicable, and should be integrated into the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP)
materiality assessment.
13. The materiality assessment of ESG risks should use a risk-based approach that takes into account the likelihood of occurrence and the potential magnitude of the financial effects of ESG
risks in the short and medium term and over a long-term horizon of at least 10 years.
14. With a view to comprehensively assessing the materiality of ESG risks, institutions should
ensure that the scope of their materiality assessment sufficiently reflects the nature, size and
complexity of their activities, portfolios, services, and products. Institutions should consider
the impact of ESG risks on all traditional financial risk categories to which they are exposed,
including credit, market, liquidity, operational (including litigation), reputational, business
model and concentration risks. The determination of material ESG risks should consider both
6

Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements,
consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (OJ L 182,
29/06/2013, p. 19).
7
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards (OJ L, 2023/2772, 22.12.2023).

18

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

their impacts on financial risk categories and the amounts and/or shares of exposures,
revenues and profits exposed to the risks.
15. With regard to the materiality assessment of environmental risks, institutions should use both
qualitative and quantitative information. Institutions should consider a sufficiently large
scope of environmental factors that includes at least climate-related factors, degradation of
ecosystems and biodiversity loss. Institutions should assess both transition and physical risk
drivers, taking into account at least the following:
a) For transition risks:
i. the main economic sectors that the financed assets support or in which the
institution’s counterparty has its principal activities;
ii. ongoing and potential future material changes in public policies, technologies
and market preferences (e.g. new environmental regulations or tax incentives, development of innovative low-carbon technologies, shifts in consumer
or investor demand);
iii. with respect to climate-related risks:
1. exposures towards sectors that contribute highly to climate change
as specified in Recital 6 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2020/1818 i.e. the sectors listed in Sections A to H and Section L of
Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 8 , with particular
consideration given to exposures towards fossil fuel sector entities;
2. the degree of alignment or misalignment of portfolios with the
relevant regulatory objectives of the jurisdictions where they operate
– for SNCIs and other non-large institutions at least on the basis of a
high-level qualitative assessment;
b) For physical risks:
i. the geographical areas in which key assets of counterparties (e.g. production
sites) and, in particular for real estate exposures, physical collateral is located;
ii. the vulnerability level to environmental hazards (e.g. temperature-related,
wind-related, water-related, solid mass-related hazards) associated with different climate scenarios and transition pathways or, for SNCIs and other nonlarge institutions, associated with at least one adverse scenario.

8

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards minimum standards for EU Climate Transition Benchmarks and EU
Paris-aligned Benchmarks (OJ L 406, 03/12/2020, p. 17) - Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation - Recital 6: Sectors
listed in Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006

19

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

16. Institutions should substantiate and document as part of their ICAAP their materiality
assessments of ESG risks, including methodologies and thresholds used, inputs and factors
considered and main results and conclusions reached, including non-materiality conclusions.
17. Institutions should develop and implement measurement methods, risk management
arrangements and transition planning processes, respectively in accordance with Section 4.2,
Section 5, and Section 6, that are commensurate with and informed by the outcomes of the
materiality assessment. To this end, institutions should have more extensive and
sophisticated arrangements for ESG risks identified as material. In turn, the ESG risk
measurement methodologies and ESG risk monitoring metrics used by institutions should
support and inform the regular updates of the materiality assessment. Smaller institutions
with less complex activities may apply less extensive and sophisticated arrangements, which
however should be commensurate with the results of their materiality assessment of ESG
risks.

4.2 Identification and measurement of ESG risks
4.2.1 General principles
18. As part of the minimum standards to identify and measure ESG risks, institutions’ internal
procedures should include tools and methodologies to assess ESG risk drivers and their transmission channels into the different prudential risk categories and financial risk metrics affecting the institution’s exposures, including with a forward-looking perspective.
19. To ensure a proper identification and management of ESG risks, institutions should consider
the potential impact of these risks in the short, medium and long term. The level of granularity
and accuracy of data points, quantification tools, methods and indicators used by institutions
should take into account their materiality assessment and their size and complexity and generally be higher for the short and medium term. Long-term time horizons should at least be
considered from a qualitative perspective and support strategic assessments and decisionmaking.
20. With regard to environmental risks, internal procedures and methodologies should allow institutions to:
a. quantify climate-related risks, such as by estimating the probabilities of materialisation and magnitude of financial impacts stemming from climate-related factors;
b. properly understand the financial risks that may result from other types of environmental risks, such as those stemming from the degradation of nature, including biodiversity loss and the loss of ecosystem services, or the misalignment of activities with
actions aimed at protecting, restoring, and/or reducing negative impacts on nature;

20

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

c. establish key risk indicators (KRIs) covering at least short- and medium-term time horizons and a scope of exposures and portfolios determined in line with the results of
the materiality assessment.
21. With regard to social and governance risks, where quantitative information is initially lacking,
institutions’ internal procedures should provide for methods that start by evaluating qualitatively the potential impacts of these risks on the operations of, and financial risks faced by,
the institution, and should progressively develop more advanced qualitative and quantitative
measures. Institutions should gradually enhance their approaches in line with regulatory, scientific, data availability and methodological progress.
22. With regard to the interactions between the different categories of, respectively, environmental, social and governance risks, institutions’ internal procedures should ensure that each
category of risk is first assessed taking into account its specific characteristics, before considering potential interconnections and interdependencies in the measurement of these risks.
4.2.2 Data processes
23. Institutions’ internal procedures should provide for the implementation of sound information
management systems to identify, collect, structure and analyse the data that is necessary to
support the assessment, management and monitoring of ESG risks. Such systems should be
implemented across the institution as part of the overall data governance and IT infrastructure. Institutions should regularly review their practices to ensure they remain up to date with
public (e.g. increased data availability due to regulatory initiatives) and market developments
and should have in place arrangements to assess and improve data quality.
24. Institutions’ internal procedures should ensure that institutions gather and use the information needed to assess, manage, and monitor the current and forward-looking ESG risks
they may be exposed to via their counterparties, by aiming at collecting client- and asset-level
data at an appropriately granular level.
25. Institutions’ internal procedures should build on both internally and externally available ESG
data, including by regularly reviewing and making use of sustainability information disclosed
by their counterparties, in particular in accordance with European Sustainability Reporting
Standards developed under the Directive 2013/34/EU or voluntary reporting standard for
non-listed Small and Medium-size Enterprises (SMEs) as per the Communication COM (2023)
535 on the SME relief package9.
26. Institutions should assess which other sources of data would effectively support the
assessment, management and monitoring of ESG risks, such as information obtained through
engagement with clients and counterparties as part of new and existing business
relationships, or third-party data. When institutions use services of third-party providers to
9

COM (2023) 535 - Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - SME Relief Package

21

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

gain access to ESG data, institutions should ensure they have a sufficient understanding of the
sources, data and methodologies used by data providers, including their potential limitations.
27. Where the quality or availability of data is initially not sufficient to meet risk management
needs, institutions should assess these gaps and their potential impacts. Institutions should
take and document remediating actions, including the use of estimates or proxies, e.g. based
on sectoral- and/or regional-level characteristics and, when feasible, making adjustments to
account for counterparty-specific aspects. Institutions should seek to reduce the use of
estimates and proxies over time as ESG data availability and quality improve.
28. For large corporate counterparties as defined by Article 3(4) of Directive 2013/34/EU,
institutions should consider collecting or obtaining the following data points, where
applicable:
a. For environmental risks:
i.

geographical location of key assets (e.g. production sites) and exposure to
environmental hazards (e.g. temperature-related, wind-related, water-related, solid
mass-related hazards) at the level of granularity needed for appropriate physical risk
analysis, and availability of insurance;

ii.

current and, if available, targeted greenhouse gas (GHG) scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions in
absolute value and, where relevant, in intensity value;

iii.

dependency on fossil fuels, either in terms of economic factor inputs or revenue base;

iv.

energy and water demand and/or consumption, either in terms of economic factor
inputs or revenue base;

v.

level of energy efficiency for real estate exposures and the debt servicing capacity of
the counterparty;

vi.

the current and anticipated financial effects of environmental risks and opportunities
on the counterparty’s financial position, financial performance and cash flows;

vii.

transition-related strategic plans, including transition plan for climate change
mitigation disclosed in accordance with Article 19a or Article 29a of Directive (EU)
2022/2464, when available;
b. For social and governance risks:

i.

alignment with the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights and International Labour Organisation
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work;

22

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

ii.

negative material impacts on own workers, workers in the value chain, affected
communities and consumers/end-users including information on due diligence efforts
or processes to avoid and remediate such impacts.

29. For exposures towards other types of counterparties than large corporates, institutions
should:
a. determine the data points needed for the identification, measurement and
management of ESG risks, considering the list provided in paragraph 28 to support
that assessment;
b. where needed to address data gaps, use expert judgment, qualitative data,
portfolio-level assessments and proxies in line with paragraph 27.
4.2.3 Main features of reference methodologies for the identification and
measurement of ESG risks
30. Institutions’ internal procedures should provide for a combination of risk assessment
methodologies, including exposure-based, sector-based, portfolio-based, and scenario-based
methodologies, as set out in paragraphs 31 to 42. The combination of methodologies should
be put together in a way that allows institutions to comprehensively assess ESG risks over all
relevant time horizons. In particular, institutions should at least use exposure-based methods
to obtain a short-term view of how ESG risks are impacting the risk profile and the profitability
of their counterparties, use sector-based, portfolio-based and scenario-based methods to
support the medium-term planning process and the definition of risk limits and risk appetite
for steering the institution towards its strategic objectives, and assess through scenario-based
methods their sensitivities to ESG risks across different time horizons including long-term
ones.

a.

Exposure-based methods

31. At an exposure-based level, in line with the provisions in paragraphs 126 and 146 of the EBA
Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring, institutions should have internal procedures
in place to assess the exposure of their counterparties’ activities and key assets to ESG factors,
in particular environmental factors and the impact of climate change, and the
appropriateness of the mitigating actions. To this end, institutions should ensure that ESG
factors, in particular environmental factors, are properly reflected in their internal risk
classification procedures, are taken into account in the overall assessment of default risk of a
borrower and, where justified by their materiality, are embedded into the risk indicators,
internal credit scoring or rating models, as well as into the valuation of collateral.
32. With regard to the assessment of environmental risks at exposure level, institutions’ internal
procedures should include a set of risk factors and criteria that capture both physical and
transition risk drivers. For large institutions, this includes, where applicable, at least the
following:
23

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

a) the degree of vulnerability to environmental hazards, taking into account the
geographical location of the key assets of counterparties and guarantors, or of the
physical collateral backing the exposures, considering both on-balance sheet and offbalance sheet exposures;
b) the degree of vulnerability to transition risks, taking into account relevant technological
developments, the impact of applicable or forthcoming environmental regulations
affecting the sector of activity of the counterparty, the current and if any targeted GHG
emissions in absolute and, where relevant, intensity value of the counterparty, the
impact of evolving market preferences, and the level of energy efficiency in the case of
residential or commercial real estate exposures together with the debt service capacity
of counterparties;
c) the exposure of the counterparty’s business model and/or supply chain to critical
disruptions due to environmental factors such as the impact of biodiversity loss, water
stress or pollution;
d) the exposure of the counterparty to reputational and litigation risks taking into account
completed, pending or imminent litigation cases related to environmental issues;
e) the (planned) maturity or term structure of the exposure or asset;
f)

risk-mitigating factors, such as private or public insurance coverage, for example based
on applicable national catastrophe schemes or similar frameworks, and the capacity of
the counterparty to ensure resilience to transition and physical risks including through
forward-looking transition planning.

33. Where data needed to assess certain criteria is not yet available, such as for smaller corporate
counterparties, institutions should follow the steps outlined in paragraphs 26, 27 and 29.
34. With regard to the assessment of social and governance risks at exposure level, institutions
should implement due diligence processes with a view to assessing the financial impacts
stemming from, and the vulnerability of counterparties’ business model to, social and
governance factors, taking into account the adherence of corporate counterparties to social
and governance standards such as those mentioned in paragraph 28 b(i), the exposure of the
counterparty to litigation risk driven by social or governance issues, as well as the applicable
legislation in the jurisdiction where the counterparty operates.

b.

Sector-based, portfolio-based and portfolio alignment methods

35. Institutions’ internal procedures should provide for sector-based and portfolio-based
methodologies, in particular heat maps that highlight ESG risks of individual economic (sub-)
sectors in a chart or on a scaling system as referred to in paragraphs 127 and 149 of the EBA
Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring. Institutions’ methodologies should allow to
24

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

map their portfolios according to ESG risk drivers and identify any concentration towards one
or more type(s) of ESG risks.
36. With regard to non-climate related ESG factors, large institutions should develop:
a) methods to identify sectors that are highly dependent on, or have significant impact
on, ecosystem services, and tools to measure the financial impact of nature
degradation and actions aimed at protecting, restoring and/or reducing negative
impacts on nature;
b) approaches to measuring the positive or adverse impacts of their portfolios on the
achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and evaluating potential
related financial risks.
37. With regard to climate-related risks, institutions’ internal procedures should provide for the
use of at least one portfolio alignment methodology to assess on a sectoral basis the degree
of alignment of institution’s portfolios with climate-related pathways and/or benchmark
scenarios. Institutions should also consider assessing the alignment at counterparty level e.g.
by comparing the GHG emissions intensity of a given counterparty with an applicable sectoral
benchmark.
38. For the purposes of paragraph 37, institutions should use scenarios that are science-based,
relevant to sectors of economic activity and the geographical location of their exposures, up
to date and originating from national, EU or international organisations such as national
environmental agencies, Joint Research Center of the EU Commission, the International
Energy Agency, Network for Greening the Financial System, International Panel on Climate
Change. Sectoral decarbonisation pathways should be consistent with the applicable policy
objective, such as the EU objective to reach net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 and to reduce
emissions by 55% by 2030 compared to the 1990 level, or any national objective where
applicable.
39. For the purposes of paragraph 37, institutions should determine the appropriate scope of the
portfolio alignment assessments and the degree of sophistication of the methodologies used
based on the characteristics of their portfolios, the results of their materiality assessment and
their size and complexity. Large institutions with securities traded on a regulated market
within the Union should take into account the list of sectors included in Template 3 of Annex
I of the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/245310. SNCIs and other non-large
institutions may use representative samples of exposures in their portfolios to undertake
portfolio alignment assessments.

10

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 of 30 November 2022 amending the implementing technical
standards laid down in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/637 as regards the disclosure of environmental, social and
governance risks (OJ L 324, 19.12.2022, p. 1).

25

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

40. Institutions should justify and document their methodological choices including the choice of
scenario(s) and the base year, the selection of sectors and, for SNCIs and other non-large
institutions, the identification of a representative sample of exposures, as well as any
significant methodological change over time. When data needed to measure alignment is
missing, institutions should follow the steps set out in paragraphs 26, 27 and 29.
41. Institutions should consider insights gained from climate portfolio alignment methodologies
to:
a. assess and monitor climate-related transition risks stemming from misalignments of
counterparties and/or portfolios with EU, Member State or third-country regulatory
objectives and pathways consistent with applicable climate goals, and potential
related financial risks;
b. inform their decision-making process on the formulation and implementation of their
risk appetite, business strategy and transition planning including regarding
prioritisation of engagement with certain counterparties.

c.

Scenario-based methods

42. In addition to exposure-based, sector-based, portfolio-based and portfolio alignment
methods, institutions’ internal procedures should provide for the use of scenario-based
analyses to test their resilience to ESG risks, starting with climate-related risks, under various
scenarios11.

11

Point d) of the mandate included in Article 87a(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU will be addressed through the development
of complementary EBA Guidelines on scenario analysis to test the resilience of institutions to environmental, social and
governance factors.

26

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

5. Minimum standards and reference
methodology for the management and
monitoring of ESG risks
5.1 ESG risk management principles
43. For the purposes of integrating ESG risks into the institution-wide risk management framework in accordance with paragraph 152 of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, institutions should consider the role of ESG risks as potential drivers of all traditional categories
of financial risks, including credit, market, operational (including litigation), reputational, liquidity, business model, and concentration risks.
44. Institutions should embed ESG risks within their regular risk management systems and processes ensuring consistency with their overall business and risk strategies, including plans in
accordance with Article 76(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU as further specified in Section 6. Institutions should ensure that they have a fully integrated approach where ESG risks are properly
captured and considered as part of risk management strategies, policies and limits. Where
institutions have in place specific arrangements for ESG risks, they should ensure this is reflected in, and feeds into, the regular risk management framework.
45. Institutions should develop a robust and sound approach to managing and mitigating ESG
risks over the short and medium term and over a long-term horizon of at least 10 years, taking
into account the principles outlined in paragraph 19.
46. Institutions should determine which combination of risk management and mitigation tools
would best contribute to this, by considering a range of tools, including the following:
a)

engagement with counterparties aiming at better understanding the risk profile of the
counterparty and at ensuring consistency with the institution’s risk appetite and strategic objectives, in particular by:
i. determining the scope of counterparties with whom to engage, taking into
account the outcomes of the materiality assessment and of the risk measurement process;
ii. establishing a dialogue with those counterparties to review their resilience
towards ESG risks, taking into account the sectoral legislation that affects
those counterparties and any transition plan they have developed;
iii. where relevant and possible, providing relevant information and advice to
clients on the assessment or mitigation of ESG risks they are exposed to; and
27

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

iv. considering a range of counterparty-specific actions, such as adjustment to
product offering, agreement on a plan and remedial actions to support transition efforts and an enhanced resilience of the counterparty, or as a last resort cessation of the relationship when continuation is considered incompatible with the institution’s planning and risk appetite.
b) adjusting financial terms (e.g. including contractually-agreed safeguards and corrective measures), conditions (e.g. tenor) and/or pricing based on ESG risk-relevant criteria and the institution’s risk strategy and internal capital policy;
c) considering ESG risks when developing sectoral policies and when setting global, regional and sectoral risk limits, exposure limits and deleveraging strategies;
d) diversification of lending and investment portfolios based on ESG risk-relevant criteria, e.g. in terms of economic sectors or geographical areas;
e) other risk management tools deemed appropriate in line with the institution’s risk
appetite, such as a possible reallocation of financing between and within sectors towards exposures more resilient to ESG risks.

5.2 Strategies and business models
47. Institutions should account for ESG risks when developing and implementing their overall
business and risk strategies, which should include at least:
a) understanding and assessing the business environment in which they operate, and
how they are exposed to structural changes in the economy, financial system, and
competitive landscape over the short, medium and long term as a result of ESG factors;
b) understanding and assessing how ESG risks, in particular environmental risk drivers
including transition and physical risks, can have an adverse impact on the viability of
their business model and sustainability of their business strategy, including profitability and revenue sources, over the short, medium and long term;
c) considering how these ESG risks, in particular environmental risk drivers including
transition and physical risks, may affect their ability to achieve their strategic objectives and remain within their risk appetite;
d) formulating, implementing and monitoring plans and targets as set out in Section 6.
48. For the purposes of paragraph 47 and with a view to ensuring sufficiently informed strategies,
institutions should consider insights gained from a combination of forward-looking risk assessment methods, including:
28

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

a) portfolio alignment methodologies, as described in Section 4.2;
b) environmental risk scenario analyses, taking into account the (potential) business environment(s) in which they might be operating in the short, medium and long term,
including a time horizon of at least 10 years;
c) climate or environmental stress tests performed by the institution.
49. Institutions should have a comprehensive understanding of their business model, strategic
objectives and risk strategy from an ESG risk perspective and should ensure that their governance, transition planning process and risk management framework, including risk appetite,
are adequate to implement them.

5.3 Risk appetite
50. Institutions should ensure that their risk appetite clearly defines and addresses ESG risks
which are part of their risk inventory following the materiality assessment. The risk appetite
should specify the level and types of ESG risks institutions are willing to assume in their portfolio, including as regards the portfolio’s concentration and diversification objectives. The integration of ESG risks in the risk appetite should be consistent with the institution’s strategic
objectives and commitments and with the plans and targets specified under Section 6.
51. The risk appetite should be implemented with the support of ESG-related KRIs, including e.g.
potential limits, thresholds or exclusions. For the determination of relevant and appropriate
KRIs, institutions should consider the results of their materiality assessment and the specific
features of their business model, taking into account relevant business lines, activities, products, and exposures towards economic sectors and geographies, including jurisdictions and
more granular geographical areas. Institutions should consider the metrics listed in Section
5.7 when determining which selected KRIs to use in their risk appetite framework.
52. Institutions should ensure that all relevant group entities and business lines and units bearing
risk properly understand and implement the institution’s risk appetite in terms of ESG risks.
In particular in large institutions risk limits should be set at different levels within the institution, ensuring consistency with the overall risk appetite, and should anchor ESG risk considerations in relation to the products or financial instruments issued, originated or held by the
institution, client segments, type of collateral and risk mitigation instruments.
53. The institution’s risk appetite and associated KRIs should be subject to monitoring and escalation processes as set out in paragraph 80.

5.4 Internal culture, capabilities and controls
54. Institutions should develop on an ongoing basis their capabilities to identify, assess, monitor,
manage and mitigate ESG risks as appropriate. Institutions should ensure, as part of their
29

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

training policy, that their management body and staff are adequately trained to understand
the implications of ESG factors and ESG risks with a view to fulfilling their responsibilities effectively. The policies and procedures on training activities should be kept up to date and take
into account scientific and regulatory developments; the procedure for managers should take
into account that knowledge of ESG factors and ESG risks is relevant for the assessment of the
suitability of members of the management body and for key function holders in line with the
Joint EBA and ESMA Guidelines on suitability assessments12.
55. The sound and consistent risk culture that accounts for ESG risks implemented within the
institution in accordance with Title IV of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance13 should
include clear communication from the management body (‘tone from the top’) and appropriate measures to promote knowledge of ESG factors and ESG risks across the institution, as
well as awareness of the institution’s ESG strategic objectives and commitments.
56. For the purposes of Title V of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance14, institutions should
incorporate ESG risks into their internal control frameworks across the three lines of defence.
The internal control framework should include a clear definition and assignment of ESG risk
responsibilities and reporting lines.
57. The first line of defence should be responsible for undertaking assessments of ESG risks, taking into account materiality and proportionality considerations, during the client onboarding,
credit application, credit review and, where relevant, investing processes, and in ongoing
monitoring and engagement with existing clients. Staff in the first line of defence should have
an adequate understanding and knowledge to be able to identify potential ESG risks.
58. As part of the activities of the second line of defence:
a) the risk management function should be responsible for undertaking ESG risk assessment and monitoring independently from the first line of defence, including by ensuring adherence to the risk limits, questioning and where necessary challenging the
initial assessment conducted by the business relationship officers;
b) the compliance function should oversee how the first line of defence ensures adherence to applicable ESG risk legal requirements and internal policies, and should advise
the management body and other relevant staff on measures to be taken to ensure
such compliance. In addition, in relation to the sustainability claims and/or commitments made by the institution, it should provide advice on the reputational and conduct risks associated with the implementation or failure to implement such claims
and/or commitments;

12

Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key
function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU (EBA/GL/2021/06)
13
Title IV – Risk culture and business conduct
14
Title V – Internal control framework and mechanisms

30

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

c) the compliance function and the risk management function should be consulted for
the approval of new products with ESG features or for significant changes to existing
products to embed ESG aspects.
59. As third line of defence, the internal audit function (IAF) should provide an independent review and objective assurance of the quality and effectiveness of the overall internal control
framework and systems in relation to ESG risks, including the first and second lines of defence
and the ESG risk governance framework.

5.5 Internal capital adequacy assessment process and internal
liquidity adequacy assessment process
60. Institutions should incorporate material ESG risks and their impacts on financial risk categories into their ICAAP to assess, and maintain on an ongoing basis, the amounts, types and
distribution of internal capital that they consider adequate to cover the nature and level of
ESG risks, taking into account the short, medium and long term.
61. When institutions take into account longer time horizons for the coverage of ESG risks, these
time horizons should be used as a source of information to ensure a sufficient understanding
of the potential implications of ESG risks for capital planning within the regular ICAAP time
horizons. The time horizons considered for the determination of adequate internal capital to
cover ESG risks should be consistent with the time horizons used as part of the institutions’
overall ICAAP. The ICAAP should be sufficiently forward-looking and where an institution assesses that risks should not be covered by capital but be mitigated through other tools or
actions, it should be explained.
62. Institutions should use insights gained from their risk assessment methodologies, including
those referred to in Section 4.2, to identify and measure internal capital needs for exposures
or portfolios assessed as more vulnerable to ESG risks, taking into account the differing levels
of availability and maturity of quantification methodologies for environmental risks compared
to social and governance risks.
63. With regard to environmental risks, institutions should include in their ICAAP a forward-looking view of their capital adequacy under an adverse scenario that includes specific environmental risks elements. In addition, institutions should specify any changes to the institution’s
business plan or other measures derived from climate or environmental risks stress testing
and/or reverse stress testing, in line with paragraph 90 of EBA Stress Testing Guidelines15.
64. Institutions should incorporate material environmental risks and their impacts on liquidity in
their internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) over appropriate time horizons
within the scope of the ILAAP coverage.

15

EBA Guidelines on institutions stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04)

31

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

65. Institutions should include in their ICAAP and ILAAP frameworks a description of the risk appetite, thresholds and limits set for, respectively, material ESG risks and material environmental risks and their impacts on their solvency or liquidity, as well as the process applied to keeping these thresholds and limits up to date. Institutions should provide sufficient contextual
information to understand their analysis of the capital and liquidity implications of, respectively, ESG and environmental risks, including by providing clarity on the methodologies used
and underlying assumptions.
66. When integrating ESG risks into their ICAAP and environmental risks in their ILAAP, the complexity of the processes and the degree of sophistication of the methodologies used by institutions should take into account their size and complexity and the results of their materiality
assessment.

5.6 Policies and procedures for financial risk categories
67. Institutions should understand and manage the current and potential future impact of ESG
risks on their exposures to credit risk, on the valuation of their positions subject to market
risk, in particular for prudent valuation purposes, on their liquidity risk profile and buffers, on
their operational (including litigation) risks, and on reputational risks, including through the
use of forward-looking analyses.
5.6.1 Credit risk
68. For the purposes of integrating ESG risks into credit risk policies and procedures as set out in
paragraph 56 of the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring, institutions should
ensure that their credit sectoral policies, reflecting ESG risks, are cascaded down and translated into clear origination criteria available to business lines staff and credit decision-makers,
and should ensure that ESG risks are embedded into the credit risk monitoring framework.
69. With regard to environmental risks, institutions should include in their policies and procedures a combination of qualitative and quantitative aspects. Based on their materiality assessment and their risk appetite, institutions should set quantitative credit risk metrics covering the most significant client segments, types of collateral and risk mitigation instruments.
5.6.2 Market risk
70. With respect to market risk, institutions should consider how ESG risks could affect the value
of the financial instruments in their portfolio, evaluate the potential risk of losses on their
portfolio and increased volatility in their portfolio’s value, and establish effective processes
to control or mitigate the associated impacts as part of their market risk management framework including where needed reviewing the trading book risk appetite and setting internal
limits for positions or client exposures.

32

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

5.6.3 Liquidity and funding risk
71. With respect to liquidity and funding risk, institutions should at least consider how ESG risks
could affect net cash outflows (e.g. increased drawdowns of credit lines) or the value of assets
that constitute their liquidity buffers and, where appropriate, incorporate these impacts into
the calibration of their liquidity buffers or their liquidity risk management framework.
72. In addition, with regard to environmental risks, institutions should consider how these risks
could affect the availability and/or stability of their funding sources and take them into account in their management of funding risk. To this end, institutions should consider different
time horizons and both normal and adverse conditions, which should reflect among others
the potential impacts of environmental risks on reputational risks, a situation of hampered or
more expensive access to market funding and/or accelerated deposit withdrawals.
5.6.4 Operational and reputational risks
73. With respect to operational risk, institutions should consider how ESG risks could affect the
different regulatory operational risk event types referred to in Article 324 of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013 and their ability to continue providing critical operations and should incorporate
material ESG risks in their operational risk management framework.
74. With regard to environmental risks, institutions should:
a) identify and label losses related to environmental risks in their operational losses registers, in line with the risk taxonomy and methodology to classify the loss events set
out by the regulatory technical standards adopted by the Commission pursuant to
Article 317(9) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013;
b) develop processes to assess and manage the likelihood and impact of environmentrelated litigation risks;
c) use scenario analysis to determine how physical risk drivers can impact their business
continuity; and
d) take material environmental risks into account when developing business continuity
plans.
75. With respect to reputational risks, institutions should consider and manage the impact of ESG
risks on their reputation, including by considering potential risks associated with lending to
and investing in businesses which may be prone to ESG-related controversies, such as violations of social or human rights. Institutions should also consider, where applicable, the reputational risks associated with the failure to deliver on their sustainability commitments or
transition plans, or with the (perceived) lack of credibility of such commitments and plans.

33

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

76. As part of their management of conduct, litigation and reputational risks, institutions should
have in place sound processes to identify, prevent and manage risks resulting from greenwashing or perceived greenwashing practices taking into account the ESAs high-level principles set out in Section 2.1 of the EBA Final Report on greenwashing monitoring and supervision16. To this end, institutions should take all necessary steps to ensure that sustainabilityrelated communication is fair, clear, and not misleading, and that sustainability claims are
accurate, substantiated, up to date, provide a fair representation of the institution’s overall
profile or the profile of the product, and are presented in an understandable manner. That
should be done at both the institution level (e.g. in relation to sustainability commitments
including forward-looking targets) and the product or activity level (e.g. in relation to products
and activities marketed as sustainable), including by monitoring legal developments, market
practices, and controversies around alleged greenwashing practices.
5.6.5 Concentration risk
77. With respect to concentration risk, institutions should consider and manage the risks posed
by concentrations of exposures or collateral in single counterparties, interdependent counterparties or in certain industries, economic sectors, or geographic regions which may present
a higher degree of vulnerability to ESG risks. To identify ESG-related concentration risks, institutions should consider the size and/or shares of their exposures that may be affected by ESG
risks relative to total exposures and as a proportion of Tier 1 capital. Institutions should take
into account several ESG factors amongst which GHG emissions, sectoral characteristics, vulnerability of geographical areas to physical risks, and social or governance deficiencies or controversies identified in jurisdictions where exposures or collateral are located, as well as the
availability of risk mitigating factors. Institutions should assess if and how ESG-related concentration risk aggravates the prior financial vulnerability of exposures.

5.7 Monitoring
78. Institutions should monitor ESG risks through effective internal reporting frameworks that
convey appropriate information and aggregated data to senior management and the management body, such as by integrating ESG risks into regular risk reports or in the form of dashboards containing metrics that support an effective oversight.
79. Institutions should monitor ESG risks on a continuous basis and ensure that they maintain an
institution-wide view, adequately covering the nature, size and complexity of their activities,
as well as, for the most significant portfolios determined on the basis of the materiality assessment, a portfolio view of their vulnerability to ESG risks. Furthermore, institutions should
implement granular and frequent monitoring of counterparties, exposures, and portfolios assessed as materially exposed to ESG risks, including through incorporating considerations of
ESG risks into the credit risk monitoring process of retail counterparties and into regular credit

16

EBA Final report on greenwashing monitoring and supervision (EBA/REP/2024/09)

34

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

reviews for medium-sized and large counterparties and/or by increasing the frequency and
granularity of these reviews due to ESG risks.
80. Institutions should set early warning indicators and thresholds and should have in place procedures to escalate alerts, deviations and breaches and to take corrective and/or mitigation
actions in case limits are exceeded, including through adaptations to business strategy and
risk management tools.
81. Institutions should monitor a range of backward- and forward-looking ESG risk metrics and
indicators. Large institutions should monitor at least the following indicators:
a) Amount and share of exposures to, and income (interest, fee and commission) stemming from, business relationships with counterparties operating in sectors that highly
contribute to climate change in accordance with Recital 6 of Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2020/1818, i.e. the sectors listed in Sections A to H and Section L of
Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006.
Institutions should use a sectoral differentiation that is as granular as possible. In particular, the degree of granularity should allow institutions to monitor the amount and
share of exposures to, and income stemming from, relationships with specific counterparties, such as fossil fuel sector entities and/or companies excluded from EU
Paris-aligned benchmarks17.
b) Portfolio alignment metrics showing at a sectoral level the extent to which exposures
and production capacities operated by clients are, or are projected to be,
(mis-)aligned with a pathway consistent with the applicable climate legal and regulatory objective, such as reaching net-zero GHG emissions by 2050, based on alignment
metrics relevant to the selected sectors and using methods described in Section 4.2.3
b).
Institutions should complement these indicators with information related to the assessment of potential financial risk impacts resulting from misalignments.
c) Financed GHG emissions with a breakdown by scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions in absolute
value and, where relevant, intensity relative to units of production or revenues, split
by sectors, using a sectoral differentiation that is as granular as possible and at least
for selected sectors determined on the basis of the materiality assessment.
Institutions should complement these metrics with qualitative or quantitative information and criteria supporting the interpretation of their evolution over time, including e.g. a temporary increase due to the provision of transition finance to GHG-intense counterparties, and identifying the underlying drivers of the changes in emissions.
17

In accordance with Article 12(1), points (d) to (g), and Article 12(2) of Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation.

35

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Examples of methodologies or databases that may support institutions when computing these metrics include the Global GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the
Financial Industry, developed by the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials,
and the Carbon Disclosure Project.
d) The level of progress achieved in the implementation of key financing strategies determined by the institution to ensure its resilience to ESG risks and preparedness for
the transition towards a more sustainable economy, e.g. by monitoring financial flows
towards financial assets or counterparties that share a common set of characteristics
relevant to the institution’s targets or risk appetite in relation to ESG risks.
e) Client engagement metrics providing information about:
i. the percentage of counterparties for which an assessment of ESG risks has
been performed, also as regards their transition strategies and, where available, transition plans and their consistency with the institution’s objectives,
specifying the scope of selected sectors, products and business lines covered
by these assessments;
ii. the results and outcomes of such engagement such as the positive (or any
sub-classification within that category) or negative (or any sub-classification
within that category) assessments of these counterparties’ adaptability and
resilience to the transition to a sustainable economy, the alignment progress
against the institution’s targets and objectives, and follow-up actions taken
by the institution.
f)

A breakdown of portfolios secured by real estate according to the level of energy efficiency of the collateral.

g) The ratio of financing of low-carbon energy supply technologies in relation to the financing of fossil-fuel energy supply technologies.
h) The ratio of environmentally sustainable exposures financing activities that contribute or enable the environmental objective of climate change mitigation referred to in
Article 9 point (a) of Regulation (EU) 2020/85218 in relation to the GHG-intense exposures.
i)

Levels of physical risk the institution is exposed to, and their impact on financial risks,
by considering several scenarios and all hazards relevant to the institution’s activity,
supplemented with information on the progress achieved in the implementation of
risk mitigation measures.

18

Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a
framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22/06/2020, p. 13).

36

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

j)

Measures of concentration risk related to physical risk drivers (e.g. measurement of
exposures and/or collateral in high flood risk, water-stressed or wildfire risk areas)
and transition risk drivers (e.g. exposures to sectors with elevated transition risks), by
using a sufficiently granular geographical split of exposures.

k) Amount of historical losses related to ESG risks and, based on scenario-types methods, forward-looking estimate(s) of exposures-at-risk and potential future financial
losses related to ESG risks.
l)

A measure of ESG-related reputational risk tracking how regulation, communication,
commitments or public controversies regarding current and future business-related
activities impact directly or indirectly the institution, by considering interactions with
operational risk and strategic and business model risks, such as loss of business
opportunities or strategic partnerships.

m) Any ESG-related litigation claims in which the institution has been, is or may become
involved in, based on available information.
n) The status of ESG risk-related capacity building, such as the percentage of staff who
have received specific training.
o) Metrics related to non-climate related factors such as portfolio-level dependencies
and impacts on ecosystem services, or exposures to counterparties with material dependencies or negative impacts on biodiversity, taking into account both sectoral and
geographical location information.
p) Progress against all of the institution’s targets set in relation to ESG risks and ESG
objectives, including as part of the institution’s plan as referred to in Section 6 or as
part of other sustainability commitments made by the institution.
82. SNCIs and other non-large institutions should monitor a range of indicators included under
paragraph 81, selected on the basis of the results of their materiality assessment, and should
take steps to expand the list of monitored indicators over time.
83. Institutions should have clear and well-documented methodologies pertaining to their monitoring metrics and indicators. When data needed to compute metrics is initially missing, institutions should follow the steps set out in paragraphs 26, 27 and 29.

37

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

6. Plans in accordance with Article 76(2)
of Directive 2013/36/EU
6.1 Overarching principles
84. Plans developed in accordance with Article 76(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU are a product of the
transition planning process outlined in Section 6.3 and should be based on a forward-looking
business environment analysis and a comprehensive strategic planning process within institutions. They should provide an overview of the strategic actions and risk management tools
deployed by institutions to demonstrate how they ensure their robustness towards ESG risks
and preparedness for the transition towards a climate and environmentally resilient and more
sustainable economy.
85. Institutions should ensure that their plans address forward-looking ESG risk management
aspects while being consistent with other applicable requirements including those relating to
due diligence, sustainability reporting, and strategic actions to ensure the compatibility of
business models with the transition to a sustainable economy. In particular, plans should
include objectives, actions and targets with regard to the business model and strategy of the
institution that are consistent with the plans disclosed pursuant to Article 19a or Article 29a
of the Directive 2013/34/EU, where applicable, and with ESG-related objectives or
commitments that institutions are required to meet by law or regulation, as well as those they
have voluntarily set. Where institutions disclose plans in accordance with Article 19a
paragraph 2 (a) (iii) or Article 29a paragraph 2 (a) (iii) of the Directive 2013/34/EU, they should
consider reusing the already available relevant information as a first step.
86. Institutions should ensure that their plans and targets are well integrated into their business
strategies and that they are aligned and consistent with their risk and funding strategies, risk
appetite, ICAAP and risk management framework as set out in Section 5. The extensiveness
of the governance arrangements, transition planning process, and the degree of
sophistication of objectives, targets and metrics of the plans should reflect the nature, size
and complexity of institutions’ activity and their materiality assessment of ESG risks.
87. In view of the institutions’ obligation to ensure that arrangements, processes and mechanisms related to their plans are consistent and well-integrated, including in their subsidiaries
established outside of the Union, and the obligation of those subsidiaries to be able to produce data and information relevant to the purpose of supervising consolidated plans in accordance with Article 109(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU, parent institutions should take into account ESG risks to which subsidiaries established outside of the Union are materially exposed
when elaborating and implementing the consolidated plan, by having regard to applicable
local legislation and ESG regulatory objectives, and should be able to demonstrate a wellinformed consolidated approach.
38

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

6.2 Governance
6.2.1 Roles and responsibilities
88. Institutions should clearly identify and allocate responsibilities for the development,
validation, implementation and monitoring of the plans. When assigning roles and
responsibilities at the appropriate level of seniority, institutions should take into account the
interrelation and influence that the transition planning process should have on other
processes such as the broader business strategy and risk appetite.
89. The management body should be responsible for the approval of the plans and should
oversee their implementation, including being regularly informed of relevant developments
and progress achieved in relation to the institution’s targets and taking decisions on remedial
actions in case of significant deviations.
90. For the purposes of integrating ESG risks across the three lines of defence in line with Section
5.4:
a) the first line of defence should be responsible for establishing a dialogue with
counterparties about their own transition strategies and assessing consistency with
the institution’s objectives and risk appetite, based on clear engagement policies as
set out in paragraph 109 e(i). To this end, institutions should ensure that relevant staff
possess sufficient expertise and capabilities to assess the extent to which the
transition strategies of counterparties, including their transition plans where
available, will enhance their resilience to ESG risks and align with the institution’s
targets;
b) the risk management function should ensure that the risk limits set in the risk appetite
statement as part of the risk management framework are consistent with all aspects
of the institution’s plan, including sectoral policies;
c) the IAF should review the institution’s plan as part of the risk management framework
and assess whether it complies with legal and regulatory requirements and whether
it is consistent with the risk strategy and risk appetite of the institution as regards ESG
risks. To this end, the IAF should consider whether the plan allows the institution to
detect and address changes in its risk profile, how the institution addresses deviations
from its targets, and whether the underlying assumptions, methodologies and criteria
have been selected and used with integrity.
6.2.2 Internal processes and capacity
91. Institutions should ensure meaningful and regular interaction and exchanges at all levels of
the organisation to ensure that insights and feedback from internal stakeholders can be taken
into account in the process of formulating, implementing and reviewing the plans. To this end,
39

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

institutions should at least involve units, departments and functions responsible for strategic
planning, risk management, sustainability disclosures, legal services and compliance in the
elaboration of the plans, and should assess which additional units, departments and functions
should be involved.
92. In line with Section 5.4, institutions should ensure they possess sufficient capacity, expertise
and resources to develop and implement their transition planning process as well as to
regularly assess the robustness of their plans and monitor their implementation. Institutions
should map existing gaps in skills and expertise and take remedial actions where necessary.
6.2.3 Data management
93. Institutions should have in place sound governance processes to collect, validate and
aggregate the data that are needed to inform their transition planning efforts and monitor
their implementation, including by using available public information and counterparties’
transition plans as set out in Section 4.2.2.

6.3 Transition planning
6.3.1 Scenarios and pathways
94. Institutions should understand their sensitivity to ESG risks, in particular environmental
transition and physical risks, under different scenarios, including those implying higher levels
of physical risk or a disorderly transition. Institutions should understand how different
scenarios may affect their transition planning efforts.
95. For the purposes of monitoring and addressing the specific environmental risks that may stem
from the process of adjustment towards the climate-related and environmental regulatory
objectives of the jurisdictions in which they operate, institutions should carefully select
scenarios by taking all the following steps:
a)

assess the potential implications of EU, Member States and, where relevant, third
countries’ objectives for transition pathways, at least for selected sectors determined
on the basis of the materiality assessment. In this process, institutions should take into
account the likely pathways originated from the European Green Deal, the EU Climate
Law, and the latest reports and measures prescribed by the European Scientific
Advisory Board on Climate Change;

b)

consider science-based and up-to-date scenarios originating from national, EU or
international organisations as referred to in paragraph 38;

c)

take into account voluntary or regulatory-mandated objectives or commitments of the
institution with respect to climate change mitigation and adaptation.

40

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

96. The geographical reference and granularity, such as in terms of regional breakdowns, of the
scenarios and pathways used by institutions should be relevant to their business model and
exposures.
97. The range and complexity of the scenarios used by institutions should be proportionate to
their size and complexity. SNCIs and other non-large institutions may rely on a simplified set
of main parameters and assumptions, included risks, time horizons considered, and regional
breakdown of impacts. Large institutions should benchmark their plans (including final and
intermediary targets) against a scenario compatible with the limiting of global warming to
1.5°C in line with the Paris Agreement and with the objective of achieving climate neutrality
by 2050 as established by the EU Climate Law.
98. Institutions should ensure that scenarios and pathways used as part of their plans are
consistent across the organisation and time horizons considered, such as when building
business strategies and setting targets for the short, medium and long term. Institutions
should document the process for scenario selection, and the reasons for any change or
different usage. Decisions to use different scenarios for different purposes as well as decisions
to modify scenarios should be clearly justified.
6.3.2 Time horizons and milestones
99. Institutions should establish a set of different time horizons as part of their plans which should
include the short term, medium term and a long-term planning horizon of at least 10 years.
The arrangements developed to monitor and address ESG risks across time horizons should
take into account the principles outlined in paragraph 19.
100. Institutions should set milestones at regular time intervals to monitor and address ESG risks
that stem from the short-, medium- and long-term regulatory objectives of the jurisdictions
in which they operate. This includes the objectives of the EU to reduce GHG emissions by 55%
by 2030 compared to 1990 level and achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, other intermediate
climate targets set by EU or, where applicable, national legislation, as well as objectives
related to other environmental factors such as nature restoration19 or deforestation20.
101. Institutions should ensure that short-, medium- and long-term objectives and targets
interact and are well-articulated. This includes ensuring that long-term objectives, such as
commitments to achieve net-zero GHG emissions, translate into medium-term strategies (e.g.
medium-term sectoral policies or growth targets for business lines) and that short-term
financial metrics or targets (e.g. profitability indicators, cost of risk, KPIs, KRIs, risk limits,
pricing frameworks) are coherent and consistent with the medium-term and long-term
objectives.
19

Regulation (EU) 2024/1991 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 June 2024 on nature restoration and
amending Regulation (EU) 2022/869 (OJ L, 2024/1991, 29.7.2024).
20
Regulation (EU) 2023/1115 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on the making available on
the Union market and the export from the Union of certain commodities and products associated with deforestation and
forest degradation and repealing Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 (OJ L 150, 09/06/2023, p. 20).

41

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

6.3.3 Materiality assessment basis
102. The transition planning process of institutions should aim at managing material ESG risks,
in particular environmental transition and physical risks identified on the basis of a robust,
regularly updated materiality assessment of ESG risks conducted in accordance with Section
4.1. Institutions should set out dedicated actions to monitor and address material ESG risks
stemming from exposures, portfolios, and the economic activities and production capacities
being financed, which may be particularly vulnerable to the process of adjustment of the
economy towards the applicable legal and regulatory objectives related to ESG factors.
6.3.4 Metrics
103. Institutions should use a range of metrics including forward-looking metrics to support
target-setting and drive and monitor the implementation of their plans.
104. For the purposes of setting targets, institutions should use a set of metrics and indicators
considering the ones included in paragraph 81. Institutions should determine, taking into
account their business strategies and risk appetite, which other risk-based and forwardlooking metrics and targets they will include in their plans with a view to monitoring and
addressing ESG risks. This includes assessing, computing, and using metrics to evaluate the
financial implications of transition planning for institutions’ business and risk profile over the
short, medium, and long term, including by measuring the impact of transition planning on
financial performance, revenue sources, profitability, and risk level of portfolios.
105. When data needed to compute metrics and support the setting of targets is missing,
institutions should follow the steps outlined in paragraphs 26, 27 and 29.
106. SNCIs and other non-large institutions may rely on a smaller range of indicators for the use
of metrics and setting of targets and formulate to a higher extent qualitative objectives.
107. Whilst institutions should at least use a combination of metrics related to climate-related
risks, they should take steps to progressively include metrics that support risk assessment and
strategic steering related to institutions’ exposure to, and management of, environmental
risks other than climate-related, e.g. risks stemming from the degradation of ecosystems and
biodiversity loss and their potential reflective influence with climate-related risks, as well as
social and governance risks.

6.4 Key contents of the plans
108. Institutions should document their plans including their methodologies, assumptions, criteria, targets and actions planned to reach targets, along with performed and scheduled revisions. Institutions should specify the scope of risks captured by each part of the plan, e.g.
whether it applies to environmental, social or governance risks, and should ensure that all
aspects of the plan address at least environmental risks.

42

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

109. Large institutions should ensure that their plans include at least the following aspects:
a. Strategic objectives and roadmap of the plans:
i. high-level overarching strategic objective to address ESG risks in the short,
medium and long term, in line with overall business strategy and risk
appetite;
ii. comprehensive set of long-term goals with intermediate milestones to
ensure resilience of the business model towards ESG risks, including
consistency of business structure and revenues with such milestones;
iii. key assumptions, inputs and background information relevant to the
understanding of institutions’ objectives and targets, including selection of
central or reference scenario(s) and institutions’ conclusions stemming
from the outcomes of materiality assessments of ESG risks, portfolio
alignment assessments and other scenario analyses;
b. Targets and metrics:
i. quantitative targets set to address ESG risks, including those stemming
from the process of adjustment towards the legal and regulatory
sustainability objectives of the jurisdictions where the institution operates
and broader transition trends towards a sustainable economy, and metrics
used to monitor ESG risks and the progress in achieving the targets;
ii. portfolios, sectors, asset classes, business lines and, where applicable,
economic activities (i.e. individual technologies) covered by targets and
monitoring metrics, ensuring that the scope of targets and metrics
sufficiently reflects the nature, size and complexity of institution’s activity
and its materiality assessment of ESG risks;
iii. time horizons over which targets and metrics apply;
c. Governance:
i. governance structure for the plans including roles and responsibilities for
the formulation, validation, implementation, monitoring and updating of
the plan, including escalation steps in case of deviation from targets;
ii. capacity and resource-related actions to ensure appropriate knowledge,
skills and expertise for effective implementation of the plan, including ESG
risk-related trainings and internal culture;

43

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

iii. remuneration policies and practices to promote sound management of
ESG risks in line with the institution’s objectives and risk appetite;
iv. data and systems used for the transition planning process;
d. Implementation strategy:
i. overview of short-, medium-, and long-term actions taken or planned in
core banking activities and processes to achieve the plan’s targets,
including how the institution embeds the plan’s objectives into its decisionmaking process and its regular risk management framework,
complemented by information on the observed effectiveness or estimated
contribution of each action to the relevant target(s);
ii. adaptations to policies and procedures on financial risk categories and to
lending and investment policies and conditions on key economic activities,
sectors and locations;
iii. changes introduced to the mix and pricing of services and products to
support the implementation of the plan;
iv. investments and strategic portfolio allocation supporting the institution’s
business strategy and risk appetite in relation to ESG risks, including
information on sustainability-related and transition-related products and
services, and how any changes in strategic financing choices are
accompanied by commensurate risk management procedures;
e. Engagement strategy:
i.

policies for engaging with counterparties, including information on the
frequency, scope and objectives of engagement, types of potential actions
and escalation processes or criteria;

ii.

processes, methodologies and metrics used for collecting and assessing
information related to counterparties’ exposure to ESG risks and
alignment towards the institution’s objectives and risk appetite;

iii.

outcomes of engagement practices, including an overview of
counterparties’ adaptability and resilience to the transition towards a
more sustainable economy.

110. SNCIs and other non-large institutions should include in their plans at least the aspects
covered in points a(i)-(ii), b(i)-(ii), c(i), d(i)-(ii) and e(i)-(ii) of paragraph 109.
111. Institutions should consider using the Annex as a supporting tool to develop and formalise
their plans.
44

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

6.5

Monitoring, review, and update of the plans

112. Institutions should monitor the implementation of their plans using monitoring processes
and metrics in line with Section 5.7 and Section 6.3.4. Institutions should perform regular
projections to assess their ability to achieve their targets.
113. The monitoring framework should allow the management body to simultaneously track
how ESG risk monitoring metrics evolve and the progress achieved towards the plan’s
milestones, with a clear and detailed rationale behind missed targets or objectives, and
evaluations of the potential impact on different types of financial risks for different time
horizons.
114. Institutions should regularly, and at least every time they update their business strategy in
accordance with Article 76(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, review and, where needed, update
their plans, taking into account updated information such as new materiality assessments of
ESG risks, developments in their portfolios and counterparties’ activities, new available
scenarios, benchmarks or sectoral pathways, and impacts of current or upcoming regulation.

45

Annex
This Annex provides a supporting tool for institutions for the development of plans required under Article 76(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU as further
specified by Section 6 of these guidelines. It does not introduce additional requirements but provides for each key content required by the guidelines
some examples, references and potential metrics that institutions may consider as they structure and formalise their plans. Institutions may adapt the
format of this common approach provided they ensure that all required key contents are included in their plans. In line with the need for consistency
with other applicable requirements as per section 6.1 and in particular paragraph 85, institutions should ensure consistency of information used to
comply with the guidelines with information disclosed in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772.

.6.4 Key contents of plans

Key words or elements of the
required key content
Clarifications and reference to
the Guidelines

Examples of qualitative and quantitative outputs and their potential supporting metrics
Potential Output
Potential Output
(Qualitative)
(Quantitative)

References to other EU
frameworks
Pillar 3

CSRD / ESRS

How to read this tool?

Direct extract from section 6.4,
paragraph 109 of the Guidelines

Key
words or
sub-element

Clarifying guidance
with reference to the
relevant section(s) or
paragraph(s) of the
Guidelines

Key
words or
sub-element

Clarifying guidance
with reference to the
relevant section(s) or
paragraph(s) of the
Guidelines

Qualitative description
of potential output related to this Guidelines' requirement:
- With examples or
‘do not forgets’,
- For example, narratives characteristics.
All examples are for illustration only.

Quantitative description
of potential output related to this Guidelines'
requirement:
- With examples or
‘warnings’ in using metrics and targets,
- For example, recalling
the different angles a KPI
could cover.
All examples of KPIs /
KRIs are for illustration
only.

Links towards Pillar 3 and ESRS
requirements that institutions,
where applicable, should consider to ensure consistency and
interconnections and rely to the
extent possible on materially
identical or significantly comparable relevant information.
References to Pillar 3 and ESRS
may need to be updated to reflect future regulatory developments.

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

6.4 Key contents of plans

a.

Key words or elements of the required key
content
Clarifications and reference to the Guidelines

Examples of qualitative and quantitative outputs and their potential supporting metrics
Potential Output (QualPotential Output
itative)
(Quantitative)

References to other EU
frameworks
Pillar 3

CSRD / ESRS

Qualitative:
Table 1
(a) (b)
Table 2
(a) (b)
Table 3
(c) (d)

ESRS-E1-1
ESRS 2 - BP1
ESRS-E1-MDR-P
ESRS-E1-2

Strategic objectives and roadmap of the plan

Overarching
objective:
i. High-level overarching strategic objective to address ESG
risks in the short, medium and
long term, in line with overall
business strategy and risk appetite.

ii. Comprehensive set of longterm goals with intermediate
milestones to ensure resilience
of the business model towards
ESG risks, including consistency
of business structure and revenues with such milestones.

This pertains to the overarching strategic objective institutions seek to accomplish concerning ESG risks, in line with
the incorporation of ESG risks
in business and risk strategies
and risk appetite in accordance with section 5.2 and section 5.3.

Short, medium and long
term:

This pertains to how the strategic objective applies across
the different time horizons
considered in accordance with
section 6.3.2.

Long term
goals:

Long term goals that support
the realisation of the overarching objective over a time
horizon of at least 10 years in
accordance with the CRD and
paragraph 99 of the Guidelines.

# Qualitative description
of strategies to ensure the
compatibility of business
models with the transition
to a climate-neutral and
sustainable economy, particularly when subject to
CSDDD and/or CSRD requirements, and how
these strategies affect the
direction and priorities for
ESG risk management initiatives
# High-level approaches
to manage ESG risks identified as most material
given the institution's
scope of activities and materiality assessment
# Long-term goals to address risks stemming from
the EU objective to
achieve net-zero GHG
emissions by 2050, with
intermediate milestone in
2030 considering the EU

# Overarching objectives could be linked to
selected KPI or KRI targets
# Cross-reference to
other parts of the plan
may be considered e.g.
towards part a(ii) or
part b

# Financial exposure to
different
economic
sectors
# Portfolio alignment
metrics
# Profitability metrics:

Qualitative:
Table 1
(b) (j)
Table 2
(b) (k) (l)
Table 3
(c) (d)

ESRS-E1-1
GHG reduction
targets: ESRSE1-4

47

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

iii. Key assumptions, inputs
and background information relevant to the understanding of institutions’ objectives and targets, including selection of central or reference scenario(s) and
institutions’ conclusions stemming from the outcomes of materiality assessments of ESG
risks, portfolio alignment assessments and other scenario analyses.

Intermediate
milestones:

Intermediate milestones
measuring progress towards
long-term goals, in accordance
with paragraph 100 of the
Guidelines.

Consistency of
business
structure and
revenues with
milestones:

How the institution will ensure
its ability to generate adequate profitability along the
path.

Key assumptions and selection of reference scenario(s):

This pertains to the documentation of key methodological
criteria and assumptions in accordance with paragraph 108,
including reference scenario(s)
selected by the institution in
line with section 6.3.1.

Outcomes of
materiality assessment,
portfolio
alignment assessments and
scenario analyses:

Key findings and conclusions
from materiality assessment,
portfolio alignment methods
and scenario analyses, conducted in accordance with section 4.

objective to reduce emissions by 55% compared to
the 1990 level
# Long-term goals and intermediate milestones to
address risks stemming
from EU objectives related to deforestation or
nature restoration
# How the institution ensures that its business
structure and revenue
streams are aligned with
its long-term goals and intermediate milestones

# Identification of and justification for scenario(s)
selected e.g. from national
environmental
agencies, Joint Research
Center of the EU Commission, IEA, NGFS, IPCC
# Qualitative description
of material environmental
transition and physical
risks faced by the institution

return and risk adjusted return indicators across relevant
breakdowns (e.g. sectors, portfolios, products...)
# Business strategy
metrics: forward looking KPIs describing the
institution's strategy in
terms of pricing, capital, liquidity, balance
sheet allocation
# Percentage of ESG
milestones achieved
on time
# Degree of alignment
or misalignment compared to climate-related pathways and/or
benchmark scenarios
for selected sectors
and/or counterparties
#
Quantitative
measures of environmental risk impacts on
financial risk categories
# Quantitative outcomes of the materiality assessment of ESG
risks

Quantitative:
Template 1
Template 3

Qualitative:
Table 1
(j) (k) (l)
Table 2
(h) (i) (j)
Table 3
(d)

ESRS-E1-SBM3
ESRS-E1-IRO
ESRS-E1-9

Quantitative:
Template 3

48

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

b.

Targets and metrics
Targets to address ESG risks
and monitoring metrics:

Quantitative targets set to
address ESG risks, including
those stemming from the process of adjustment towards the
legal and regulatory sustainability objectives of the jurisdictions
where the institution operates
and broader transition trends towards a sustainable economy,
and metrics used to monitor ESG
risks and the progress in achieving the targets.

This pertains to the metrics
and targets used by institutions in accordance with section 5.7 and section 6.3.4.

i.

Risks stemming from the
process of adjustment towards regulatory sustainability objectives:

This pertains to the specific
metrics and targets to monitor
and address ESG risks arising
from the transition and process of adjustment to the relevant regulatory objectives,
such as those included in the
EU climate law in accordance
with Article 76(2) CRD

N/A

# Exposures towards
high-risk sectors or
counterparties
# Portfolio alignment
metrics and targets
# Financed emissions
across relevant breakdowns
# Progress achieved in
key financing strategies
# Real estate portfolios
with certain level of energy efficiency
# Energy supply banking ratio
# Level of physical risk
the institution is exposed to
# Information on the
riskiness of the portfolio across relevant
breakdowns (e.g. nonperforming exposures)

Qualitative:
Table 1
(b) (c)
Table 2
(b)
Quantitative:
All templates

ESRS-E1-1
GHG reduction
targets: ESRSE1-4

49

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

ii. Portfolios, sectors, asset
classes, business lines and where
applicable economic activities
(i.e. individual technologies) covered by targets and monitoring
metrics, ensuring that the scope
of targets and metrics sufficiently reflects the nature, size
and complexity of institution’s
activity and its ESG risks materiality assessment.

iii.

Time horizons over which
targets and metrics apply.

Scope of coverage:

Time horizons:

This pertains to information
related to the scope of targets
and metrics and its significance from both a risk and financial perspective.

This pertains to the short, medium or long-term time horizons with which metrics and
targets are associated in line
with section 6.3.2.

# For each target, what
are the activities, asset
classes, sectors and business
lines
covered
# Institution-level targets
broken down into more
specific sectoral targets
# Targets applied to specific portfolios, exposures,
groups of assets or investments that share similar
characteristics or risks
# Specific, actionable targets for particular projects, technologies, or
business
activities
# On- and off-balance
sheet activities captured
# Exclusion in coverage
and planned coverage

# Qualitative description
of the set of targets and
metrics applied for the
short, medium and long
term
# Justification of shortterm increases in metrics
and targets, if applicable

# Percentage of identified ESG risks that are
actively monitored and
managed
# Percentage of business units with ESG
risk-related targets integrated into their operational
plans
# Percentage of operations in different regions that have ESG
risk-related targets and
initiatives in place
# Percentage of sectors
that have developed
specific action plans
aligned with grouplevel ESG risks targets.
# Achievement of sectoral targets

# Evolution e.g. increase/decrease in the
level of target(s) to be
achieved across different time horizons

ESRS-E1-1
ESRS 2 - MDR-T
Current revenues by sectors:
ESRS 2 - SBM -1
Qualitative:
Table 1
(b) (c) (j)
Table 2
(h) (i)

GHG reduction
targets: ESRSE1-4

Quantitative:
All templates

ESRS-E1.IRO1_10_ AR 12a
ESRS-E4-1_04
13d

50

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

c.

Governance

i. Governance structure for
the plans including roles and responsibilities for the formulation, validation, implementation,
monitoring and updating of the
plan, including escalation steps
in case of deviation from targets.

ii. Capacity and resources-related actions to ensure appropriate knowledge, skills and expertise for effective implementation
of the plan, including ESG riskrelated trainings and internal
culture.

Remuneration policies and
practices to promote sound
management of ESG risks in line
with the institution’s objectives
and risk appetite.

Governance
structure:

The governance structure for
the plan in accordance with
section 6.2.1, section 6.2.2.
and section 6.5.

Deviation and
escalation
procedure:

Governance arrangements for
decision-taking on remedial
actions in case of significant
deviations in line with paragraphs 80 and 89.

Capacity and
resources:

The capacity and resources related actions for the effective
execution of the plan, based
on an initial assessment by the
institution of the potential
gaps and needs as regards internal culture and capabilities
for ESG risks in line with section 5.4.

# Training and development programs for ESG
risks
# Hiring and recruitment
plans
# Knowledge sharing and
collaboration platforms
# Leadership commitment

Remuneration
policies and
practices:

This pertains to how the institution takes into account its
risk appetite in relation to ESG
risks as part of its remuneration policies and practices in
line with Article 74(1)e of CRD.

# Qualitative description
of how remuneration policies and practices have
been, are or will be adjusted to align with the
overarching strategic objective to address ESG

iii.

# Roles and responsibilities of the management
body, any sub-committee
and three lines of defence
# Escalation protocol that
defines the process for addressing deviations, including who should be notified and the steps to be
taken.

# Frequency of board
meetings dedicated to
the plan
# Delays in approval of
the plan
# Number of internal
audits conducted on
the plan
# Percentage of audit
recommendations implemented
# Number of escalations processed and/or
unresolved escalations
# ESG risks-related
training
completion
rate
# Identified gaps in ESG
risk-related skills and
knowledge
# Frequency and quality of internal communications
regarding
ESG risk-related objectives and progress
# Metrics used to embed the risk appetite
related to ESG risks in
remuneration policies
# Proportion of staff
with ESG risk-related
metrics included in remuneration

Qualitative:
Table 1
(e) (g) (h)
(q)
Table 2
(d) (f)
Table 3
(a)

ESRS 2 GOV-1
_AR 4

Qualitative:
Table 1
(f) (m)

ESRS 2-GOV-1 para 23
ESRS G1 GOV-1
- para 5b

Qualitative:
Table 1
(i)
Table 2
(g)
Table 3
(a)

ESRS 2-GOV-2 para 29
ESRS-E1-GOV-3

51

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

risks and with the risk appetite

iii. Data and systems used for
the transition planning process

d.

Data and systems:

This pertains to the data and
systems used for the formulation, implementation and
monitoring of plans in accordance with section 4.2.2 and
paragraph 93.

# Data inventory with an
identification of all relevant ESG risk data points
and assessment of their
availability and quality
# Policies and procedures
to ensure data quality

# Weighting of ESG-risk
related metrics in the
overall remuneration

# Percentage of relevant data points collected and available
# Percentage of systems and processes
that integrate ESG data

Qualitative:
Table 1
(p)

ESRS 1 Appendix B
ESRS 2 AR 2
ESRS 2 SBM1_42a
ESRS-E2-4_30c
ESRS-S1-6_50d
ESRS-S1-7_55b

Implementation strategy

i. Overview of short-, medium-, and long-term actions
taken or planned in core banking
activities and processes to
achieve the plan’s targets, including how the institution embeds the plan’s objectives into
its decision-making process and
its regular risk management
framework, complemented by
information on the observed effectiveness or estimated contribution of each action to the relevant target(s).

Actions taken
or planned in
core banking
activities:

Changes to
the regular
risk management framework:

This pertains to how the institution will implement its objectives and targets through
its core activity.

This pertains to how the institution will embed its targets
into the mix of existing risk
management tools (e.g.
ICAAP, ILAAP, RAS, risk limits,
capital/portfolio allocation,
budgeting process, strategic
plan, funding plan, etc), in line
with section 5.

# Implementation of new
tools for assessing ESG
risks in current portfolios
# Integration of ESG riskrelated objectives into the
medium and long-term
strategic planning and decision-making processes
# Incorporating ESG risks
into the risk management
framework

# Percentage of activities affected by implementation actions
# Percentage of business decisions that aim
at implementing the
plan's targets
# Adoption rate of ESG
risk management tools

Key actions:
ERSR-E1-1_16b
Qualitative:
Table 1
(n)
Table 2
(a)
Table 3
(c)

ESRS-E1 MDR-A
ESRS 2 MDR-A
ESRS-E1-2
ESRS-E1-3
------------------ESRS-E2-E5
ESRS-S1-S4
ESRS-G1 MDR-A
ESRS-E3 MDR-A
ESRS-E4 MDR-A
ESRS-E5 MDR-A

52

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Policies and
conditions on
activities, sectors, locations:

ii. Adaptations to policies and
procedures on financial risk categories and to lending and investment policies and conditions on
key economic activities, sectors
and locations.

Policies and
procedures on
financial risk
categories:

Policies and the conditions
that govern them, including
updates to existing policies
and newly created policies, in
line with paragraph 46(b-c).

This pertains to the adaptations made to policies and procedures in accordance with
section 5.6.

# A list of current policies
and original ESG risk status
# A roadmap detailing
which policies & conditions, and their scope, will
be updated or created,
how, when and by whom
# For each policy, the following aspects may be included:
. Goal: how it reflects the
strategic objective, risk
strategy and supports the
implementation of the
plan
. Scope: precise iteration
of business, location, sector etc that are governed
and impacted
. Conditions: clear criteria
ensuring ease of applicability and tracking
. Exclusions: any exclusions in line with risk appetite

# Policy adoption rate,
e.g. percentage of
branches or departments
that
have
adopted new ESG risks
policies
# Number of times ESG
risk policies are reviewed and updated
within a given period
# Percentage of operations in compliance
with updated ESG risk
policies

Qualitative:
Table 1
(d) (o)
Table 2
(c) (e)
Table 3
(c) (d)

ESRS-E1-1_16b
ESRS-E1-2
ESRS-E1-3

Activities related to sites
in/near biodiversity-sensitive
areas:
ESRS E4.IRO1_19a

# Outcomes of internal
and external audits focused on ESG risk management framework

53

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

iii. Changes introduced to the
mix and pricing of services and
products to support the implementation of the plan.

iv. Investments and strategic
portfolio allocation supporting
the institution’s business strategy and risk appetite in relation
to ESG risks, including information on sustainability-related
and transition-related products
and services, and how any
changes in strategic financing
choices are accompanied by
commensurate risk management
procedures.

Mix and pricing of services
and products:

Sustainabilityrelated and
transition-related products
and services:

Consistency of
strategic financing
choices with
risk management procedures:

This pertains to how the institution will adapt its mix of services and products and their
pricing based on ESG risk-relevant criteria and the institution’s risk strategy and internal capital policy, in line with
paragraph 46b.

The types of financial instruments (green and sustainability-linked loans, bonds, mortgages, funds…) and advisory
services offered or managed
by the institution.

This pertains to how the institution will ensure, when it decides to adapt its business mix
and strategy, that those
changes fit the risk management arrangements to have in
place in accordance with section 5.

# Risk-based pricing: adjusting pricing based on
the ESG risk profile of the
borrower
or
project
# Incentives for risk mitigation: offering incentives
for clients who implement
effective ESG risk mitigation strategies

# Frequency and extent
of pricing adjustments
based on ESG risk profiles
# Number of clients
taking advantage of incentive pricing

# Strategy, policies and
criteria on green or transition or ESG-linked mortgages, loans and bonds

# Growth in sustainable financing: year-toyear growth in the volume and proportion of
sustainable financing
# Default rate on green
or transition or ESGlinked mortgages or
loans

# Diversification of lending and investments portfolios based on ESG riskrelevant criteria e.g. in
terms of economic sectors
or geographical areas
# Credit risk policies on
green loans and mortgages
# How an institution that
finances renewable energy projects ensures that
the projects comply with
environmental
regulations to avoid legal and
reputational risks

# Proportion of new financed projects that
undergo a comprehensive ESG risk assessment
# Percentage of credit
decisions that explicitly
consider ESG risks
# Profit margins on
ESG-related products:
comparison of profit
margins between ESGrelated products and
traditional products

Qualitative:
Table 1
(r)
Table 2
(j)
Table 3
(d)

Qualitative:
Table 1
(m) (r)
Table 2
(e)
Quantitative:
Templates
06>10

Activities incompatible with
transition:
ESRS-E1.IRO-1
AR12

ESRS-E1-3
ESRS-E4-1 AR 1
e
Outcomes for
affected communities:
ESRS-S3-4 AR 34
b

54

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

e.

Engagement strategy

i.
Policies for engaging
with counterparties, including
information on the frequency,
scope and objectives of engagement, types of potential actions
and escalation processes or criteria.

ii.
Processes, methodologies and metrics used for collecting and assessing information related to counterparties’ exposure to ESG risks and alignment
towards the institution’s objectives and risk appetite.

Engagement
policies:

Process,
methods and
metrics for assessing ESG
risks:

Clear policies that the institution will follow to engage
identified counterparties to
achieve its strategic and risk
management objectives, taking into account outcomes of
the materiality assessment
and risk measurement methods, in line with paragraph
46a.

# Purpose and overall objective e.g. understanding
of risk profile and/or
checking consistency with
risk appetite and targets
# Available solutions to
counterparty
# Escalation and validation process

This relates to the institution's
application of exposure-based,
sector-based, portfolio-based
and portfolio alignment methods in line with section 4.2.3.

# Due diligence screening
to identify high-risk counterparties based on predefined criteria
# ESG risks reflected in internal or external scores
and/or ratings
# Methods for measuring
alignment of select counterparties against climate
pathways

# The percentage of
counterparties
with
which dialogue has
been pursued or is
planned to be pursued
# The percentage of
counterparties
for
which an assessment
of ESG risks has been
performed
# Proportion of sectors,
products and business
lines captured
# The percentage of
counterparties undergoing ESG risk due diligence
# Changes in the credit
ratings of counterparties given impact of
ESG risks
# Concentration of exposures within specific
sectors subject to elevated transition or
physical risks
# Involvement in ESGrelated controversies
or incidents

Qualitative:
Table 1
(d) (o)
Table 2
(c)
Table 3
(b) (c)

Qualitative:
Table 1
(k) (l)
Table 2
(i) (k)

ESRS 2-SBM 2

ESRS-E1.IRO-1
ESRS-E4-1.AR1a

55

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

iii.
Outcomes of engagement practices, including an
overview of counterparties’
adaptability and resilience to the
transition towards a more sustainable economy.

Outcomes:

This relates to the outcomes of
engagement, allowing for a
meaningful interpretation of
the risk profile of the counterparties and actions taken by
the institution, in line with
paragraph 81e(ii).

# Criteria used to identify
counterparties with significant ESG risks that may
require immediate attention
# Adjustment of credit
terms, such as interest
rates or collateral requirements, based on ESG risk
assessments
# Enhanced due diligence,
e.g. implementing more
rigorous due diligence
processes for high-risk
counterparties
# (More) targeted engagement, e.g. developing specific engagement plans to
address identified ESG
risks, such as setting improvement targets or offering new financial products that cater to the
needs of counterparties

# Positive (or any subclassification
within
that category) or negative (or any sub-classification within that category) assessments of
these counterparties’
resilience and alignment against the institution’s targets and
risk appetite

Qualitative
Table 1
(o)
Table 2
(m)
Table 3
(c) (d)

ESRS-E1
ESRS 2 -SBM2_45a AR 16

# Number and types of
follow-up
actions
taken by the institution

56

7. Accompanying documents
7.1 Cost-benefit analysis / impact assessment
1. On 31 May 2024, the European Commission published the directive amending the Capital Requirements Directive (from now on CRD VI). Article 87a of the CRD VI mandates the EBA to issue
guidelines to specify minimum standards and reference methodologies for ESG risk management practices. These guidelines provide the EBA answer to such mandate.
2. As per Article 16(2) of the ESAs regulation (Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, (EU) No 1094/2010
and (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council), any guidelines developed by the ESAs shall be accompanied by an Impact Assessment (IA) annex which analyses ‘the
potential related costs and benefits’ of the guidelines. Such annex shall provide the reader with
an overview of the findings as regards the problem identification, the options identified to remove the problem and their potential impacts.
3. The EBA prepared the IA included in this section analysing the policy options considered when
developing the guidelines. Given the nature of the study, the IA is qualitative in nature.
A - Problem identification
4. Environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors are causing and are expected to increasingly
lead to significant changes in the real economy that will in turn impact the financial sector
through new risks and opportunities.
5. Since the adoption of the Paris Agreement on climate change and the UN 2030 agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015, governments around the world are taking action to encourage
the transition to low-carbon and more sustainable economies. In Europe in particular, the European Green Deal targets the ambitious objective of making Europe the first climate-neutral continent by 2050 and it is expected that the financial sector will play a key role in this process.
6. In this regard, the European Commission has launched a set of initiatives to enhance the resilience and contribution of the financial sector. As a result, several efforts have been initiated to
incorporate ESG risks into prudential supervision. These guidelines target the inclusion of ESG
risks in institutions’ broader risk management frameworks.
B - Policy objectives
7. The main objective of these guidelines is to answer the mandate set up in Article 87a of the CRD
VI which requests the EBA to issue ESG risk management guidelines.
8. As a result, the general objective is to provide guidance on how institutions will incorporate ESG
risks in their risk management processes including defining how ESG risks should be considered

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

when defining business and risk strategies, risk appetite levels and internal controls, risk monitoring, etc.
9. The specific objectives of the guidelines are defined in the CRD VI mandate which indicates that
the guidelines should specify:
-

the minimum standards and reference methodologies for the identification, measurement,
management and monitoring of ESG risks;

-

the content of plans to be prepared in accordance with Article 76(2) of the CRD, which shall
include specific timelines and intermediate quantifiable targets and milestones, in order to
monitor and address the financial risks stemming from ESG factors, including those arising
from the process of adjustment and transition trends towards the relevant Member States
and Union regulatory objectives, in particular the objective to achieve climate neutrality by
2050 as set out in Regulation (EU) 2021/1119, as well as, where relevant for internationally
active institutions, third country legal and regulatory objectives;

-

the qualitative and quantitative criteria for the assessment of the impact of ESG risks on
the financial resilience and risk profile of institutions in the short, medium and long term.

C - Baseline scenario
10. The current framework does not specify any guidelines about how institutions shall incorporate
ESG risks in their internal risk management nor it defines how institutions shall define their plans
to monitor and address ESG risks. As a result, institutions may follow different criteria to consider ESG risks and incorporate them in their plans which would create divergencies in how
banks account for those risks and pose difficulty for the work of supervisors to monitor and
control that banks operate at adequate risks levels.
D - Options considered
11.When drafting the present guidelines, the EBA considered several policy options under nine
main areas:
1) Scope of the ESG risks covered by the guidelines
Article 87a of the CRD VI mandates the EBA to issue guidelines on ESG risk management
practices. The definition of risk management practices for environmental but also for
governance and social risks is an ambitious target considering the less advanced data,
methodological and regulatory developments in social and governance aspects. Therefore,
while developing the current guidelines, the EBA has analysed three possible options:
Option 1: To focus equally on the three aspects.
Option 2: To focus on environmental aspects only.
Option 3: To mainly focus on environmental aspects but give some guidance on social and
government aspects.
58

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

2) Frequency of the materiality assessment of ESG risks
Institutions should regularly assess the potential effects of ESG risks on their business models
and risk profile. Such assessment will provide the institution with a view on the financial
materiality of ESG risks to which it is or may become exposed. The adequacy of regularity in
which such assessment should be carried out will ensure that the materiality of ESG risks
remains adequately measured. Therefore, while developing the current guidelines, the EBA
has analysed three possible options:
Option 1: Every year for all institutions.
Option 2: Every two years for all institutions.
Option 3: Every year for non-SNCIs and at least every two years for SNCIs.

3) Consideration of ESG risks in banks’ business models and strategies
The needed transition towards a more sustainable economy will lead to new business
opportunities but will also expose financial institutions to risks stemming from the transition.
Therefore, while developing the current guidelines, the EBA has analysed if banks should
consider ESG risks when defining their business models and strategy. In particular, the EBA
has analysed two possible options:
Option 1: ESG risks should be considered in banks’ business models and strategies
considering different time horizons.
Option 2: ESG risks may not be considered in banks’ business models and strategies.
4) Data processes
To ensure an adequate identification and measurement of ESG risks, institutions should
analyse enough information and data. Therefore, while developing the current guidelines,
the EBA has analysed how banks’ data processes should be defined to incorporate ESG risks.
In particular, the EBA has analysed three possible options:
Option 1: Institutions may rely only on publicly available ESG data, aggregate it and exploit
it to manage ESG risks.
Option 2: Institutions should aggregate and exploit publicly available data but also collect
additional ESG data when engaging with their clients and counterparties.
Option 3: Institutions should gather and use the information needed to assess current and
forward-looking ESG risks, building on available ESG data but also considering where
needed collecting data from clients and counterparties or using third-party data, and using
where needed for certain counterparties proxies or portfolio-level assessments.
5) Features of reference methodologies for the identification and measurement of ESG
risks
When defining their methodologies to identify and measure ESG risks, institutions should
select one or more features of reference. Therefore, while developing the current guidelines,
59

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

the EBA has analysed two options regarding which are the most adequate features
institutions should refer to:
Option 1: Institutions should develop exposure-based, portfolio and sector-based, and
scenario-based methodologies.
Option 2: Institutions should develop methodologies based on at least one of the three
elements included in option 1.

6) Materiality assessment
Appropriate risk managements frameworks as well as CRD-based plans should be based on
a robust materiality assessment of the ESG risks faced by institutions. Therefore, while
developing the current guidelines, the EBA has analysed three possible options:
Option 1: The materiality assessment of ESG risks should automatically define as material
certain exposures based on their sector.
Option 2: Institutions should have full flexibility when defining the materiality of ESG risks
independently from the sector of the exposure.
Option 3: Institutions should consider certain criteria, exposures and sectors in their
assessments while remaining responsible for determining their materiality, substantiating
and documenting their assessments.
7) Data and engagement with counterparties in relation to their transition plans
To formulate and implement an adequate plan to monitor and address ESG risks, institutions
need to have information about the risks they face in the transition process and engage
clients. This includes using information about their counterparties and their own risks during
the transition process. Therefore, while developing the current guidelines, the EBA has
analysed three possible options regarding the engagement with counterparties:
Option 1: Institutions should engage and request all counterparties to submit a transition
plan as part of the due diligence phase.
Option 2: Institution should engage and request large counterparties only to submit a
transition plan as part of the due diligence phase.
Option 3: Institution should consider collecting forward-looking plans of at least large
corporate counterparties, including transition plans disclosed under CSRD, and should
determine the scope of counterparties with whom to engage, taking into account
outcomes of the materiality assessment and risk measurement methodologies.
8) Time horizons considered for banks’ plans
Institutions need to consider several time horizons as part of their transition planning
process. Therefore, while developing the current guidelines, the EBA has analysed four
possible options:
Option 1: To focus requirements on short-term time horizons.
Option 2: To focus requirements on medium-term time horizons.
Option 3: To focus requirements on long-term time horizons.
60

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Option 4: To consider several time horizons, including a long-term time horizon
articulated with short- and medium-term strategies.
9) Plans’ targets
Institutions should define targets as part of their plans. Therefore, while developing the
current guidelines, the EBA has analysed four possible options:
Option 1: To predefine the full list of metrics that institutions should target.
Option 2: Not to predefine the list of metrics that institutions should target and allow
institutions to define their own list of metrics.
Option 3: To include a minimum set of metrics that institutions should target while
seeking to complement them.
Option 4: To require institutions to consider using some metrics included in the guidelines
while complementing them.
E - Assessment of the options and preferred option
12. In respect to the different options considered, the EBA has assessed their potential cost and
benefits, and has selected a preferred option in the nine main areas considered:
1) Scope of the ESG risks covered by the guidelines
ESG risks include environmental, social and governance factors. Article 87a of the CRD VI
mandates the EBA to issue guidelines on management practices for the full scope of these risks.
However, the EU and international regulatory developments for environmental risks are more
advanced than for social and governance risks. Although it is important to continue the
development of management practices for the full set of ESG factors, it is also important to allow
enough time for institutions to introduce the necessary changes. Therefore, in order to reduce
the burden for institutions and the time pressure to adapt to the new regulatory developments,
it is considered that the guidelines should focus on environmental risks mainly, although
introducing some high-level requirements to define the management practices for social and
governance risks. This is indeed in line with the sequenced approach adopted under other EBA
regulatory products (e.g. Pillar 3 ITS). Therefore, the preferred option is Option 3: To mainly
focus on environmental aspects but give some guidance on social and government aspects.
2) Frequency of the materiality assessment of ESG risks
Institutions should perform their ESG risk materiality assessment with sufficient frequency to
ensure that any development in the external environment that could affect their exposure to
ESG factors are adequately captured. Focusing on the E factor, environmental changes can
develop in a fast manner, for example in terms of new policies or technologies or shifts in market
and consumer preferences, potentially affecting the level of banks’ exposures to environmental
risks. For these reasons, the EBA considers that banks’ materiality assessment should be carried
out with a short-term periodicity to ensure that the relevant risks are captured sufficiently and
in time. However, performing such assessment requires an intensive use of resources. It may be
disproportionate to request all types of institutions to perform such assessment with a regularity
of up to a year, as small institutions have limited resources available and such request could be
burdensome for them. An adequate balanced approach would allow SNCIs to perform the
materiality assessment with lower regularity although keeping an adequate periodicity to
61

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

capture all potential risks. For these reasons, the preferred option is Option 3: Every year for
non-SNCIs and at least every two years for SNCIs.
3) Consideration of ESG risks in banks’ business models and strategies
The following reasons justify the consideration of ESG risks in bank’s business models and
strategies:
- The time horizon of ESG risks: the full impact of ESG risks is likely to unfold in a longterm period. Additionally, changes in business models may require some time to be
implemented. Therefore, it seems reasonable that institutions follow a forward-looking
approach and consider ESG risks when defining their strategies and a business model
that will be viable and adequate when the ESG risks materialise.
- Potential negative financial impact: when defining their business model, institutions
should consider potential financial impacts that may be linked with their strategy. This
includes the consideration of ESG risks.
- Political actions in favour of transforming the current global economy into a more sustainable one: there are several examples of political actions at international and EU
level targeting a transition to a more sustainable economy. These initiatives could push
for significant changes in the business environment in the upcoming years. Banks
should anticipate the potential negative impact of such transformation and take advantages of the arising new opportunities in the redefinition of their business model.
Moreover, in recent years, some institutions have taken steps to account for ESG factors in their
business strategies. However, as concluded in the EBA report on the management and
supervision of ESG risks for credit institutions and investment firms 34 , more progress is still
needed to adequately incorporate ESG risks in banks’ strategies and business models’ definition
processes. Considering both the reasons that justify the integration of ESG risks in banks’
strategies and business models and the current insufficient implementation in banks’ processes,
the EBA considers that there is a need to incorporate such a requirement as part of the ESG risk
management guidelines and therefore the preferred option is Option 1: ESG risks should be
considered in banks’ business models and strategies considering different time horizons.
Additionally, given the distinctive impacts of ESG risks across different time horizons, banks
should consider different (including a long-term) time horizons when defining their business
models.
4) Data processes
A robust risk management framework heavily relies on data to develop robust metrics and risk
indicators. Well defined, strong data processes are key to adequately gather and exploit data to
identify and measure ESG risks. However, as explained in the EBA report on the management
and supervision of ESG risks for credit institutions and investment firms, the lack of data to
identify and measure ESG risks is one of the main challenges faced by institutions. The EBA has
balanced these two aspects when defining the way data processes should be integrated in
banks’ ESG risk management guidelines. Given the importance of having accurate data to
adequately measure ESG risks, it is considered that institutions should take action to better use
and aggregate the data already available and that will be available as a result of EU and
international developments on sustainability reporting on one hand (e.g. CSRD/ESRS), and on
34

See report here.

62

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

the other hand, improve the availability of ESG data via the collection of relevant ESG
information from their clients and counterparties as part of their business relationship. There
are other ESG regulatory developments such as the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements as per
Article 449(a) of Regulation (EU) 2019/876 that also push institutions to take action in a similar
direction. However, the collection of detailed ESG-related data for all counterparties may create
an excessive burden for institutions. In order to reduce such a burden, the EBA considers that
institutions should be able to use external data in line with the outsourcing framework, as well
as proxies, expert judgments and portfolio-level assessments in those cases where data is not
available or its collection via engagement with clients and counterparties is considered
excessively difficult. Therefore, the preferred option is Option 3: Institutions should gather and
use the information needed to assess current and forward-looking ESG risks, building on
available ESG data but also considering where needed collecting data from clients and
counterparties or using third-party data, and using where needed for certain counterparties
proxies or portfolio-level assessments.
5) Features of reference methodologies for the identification and measurement of ESG
risks
When drafting these guidelines, the EBA has analysed which features should be of reference for
institutions when defining their methodologies to identify and measure ESG risks. The possible
types of methodologies that have been considered include:
a) exposure-based methodologies, which provide a granular assessment of the ESG factors at
counterparty level;
b) portfolio and sector-based methodologies which allow institutions to have a more comprehensive risk assessment and to analyse the degree of alignment on a sectoral basis of institution’s portfolios with climate-related sustainability targets;
c) scenario-based analyses to assess ESG risks allowing for a forward-looking perspective.
The definition of methodologies to assess ESG risks at these different levels will answer to
different risk management needs. Therefore, the EBA considers that all aforementioned
perspectives are needed to adequately measure ESG risks in a comprehensive manner and
taking into account the different time horizons in which ESG risks are expected to materialise.
Therefore, the preferred option is Option 1: Institutions should develop exposure-based,
portfolio and sector-based, and scenario-based methodologies.
6) Materiality assessment
Appropriate risk management frameworks as well as CRD-based plans should be based on a
robust materiality assessment of the ESG risks faced by institutions. To guarantee consistency
across all the processes in the institutions, the materiality assessment of ESG risks should be
consistent with other materiality assessments carried out by the institution. To facilitate such
standardisation, institutions should refer to clear definitions of ESG risks and there should be a
minimum set of criteria, exposures and sectors to be considered as part of those assessments.
Given the limitations of broad, purely sector-based classifications, it is more appropriate to not
automatically define certain sectors as materially exposed to ESG risks but to emphasise banks’
responsibility to conduct robust assessments. Therefore, the preferred option is Option 3:
Institutions should consider certain criteria, exposures and sectors in their assessments while
remaining responsible for determining their materiality, substantiating and documenting their
assessments.
63

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

7) Data and engagement with counterparties in relation to their transition plans
Institutions need information about their counterparties’ risks during the transition process to
formulate and implement an adequate CRD-based plan. However, institutions may encounter
some problems while collecting such information as first, not all counterparties may have
developed a clear and structured transition plan and, second, institutions will need resources to
collect transition plans from all counterparties, review and understand them and assess the
relevant risks. In other words, the collection of all necessary data and information from
counterparties is a complex and costly process for institutions. At the same time, a
comprehensive set of information is needed to adequately evaluate the risks. The direct
interaction between the institution and the counterparty to discuss the risks that the latter may
face arising from the transition and possible options to mitigate them, is key to have a
comprehensive assessment and management of risks. In order to strike the right balance, the
EBA considers that such information should be obtained or collected at least for the large
corporate counterparties as defined by the CSRD. However, institutions should have all the
relevant data at their disposal to adequately assess the level of transition risk for all
counterparties. Therefore, the preferred option is Option 3: Institution should consider
collecting forward-looking plans of at least large corporate counterparties, including transition
plans disclosed under CSRD, and should determine the scope of counterparties with whom to
engage, taking into account outcomes of the materiality assessment and risk measurement
methodologies.
8) Time horizons considered for banks’ plans
ESG risks have distinctive impacts across time horizons. This is also the case when referring to
ESG risks arising from the transition process towards legal and regulatory objectives related to
ESG factors. Therefore, institutions should consider several time horizons when defining their
plans. They should, however, include a horizon that is long enough to cover for those risks that
may fully materialise in the long term. The preferred option is Option 4: To consider several time
horizons, including a long-term time horizon articulated with short- and medium-term strategies
9) Plans’ targets
Institutions should define targets as part of their plans. The EBA is aware that banks are already
using some metrics either voluntarily or based on current or (expected) future EU legislation but
that developments are still ongoing to design most appropriate metrics for target-setting. The
EBA considers that requiring institutions to both monitor several metrics and consider using
some of these metrics for target-setting purposes will help achieving comparable plans and
support the work of supervisors in their reviews. At the same time, it is important to allow
institutions flexibility in defining the exact combination of metrics and setting the level of targets
they deem appropriate given their business strategies. It is also important to ensure that banks
will take steps to progressively include metrics related to non-climate-related risks, in particular
risks stemming from the degradation of ecosystems and biodiversity loss, and compute and use
metrics relating to the financial implications of transition planning for their business and risk
profile. Therefore, the preferred option is Option 4: To require institutions to consider using
some metrics included in the guidelines while complementing them

64

7.2 Feedback on the public consultation
Summary of responses to the consultation and the EBA’s analysis

Comments

Summary of responses received

EBA analysis

Amendments to
the proposals

General
comments

Overall, the Guidelines are broadly welcomed as stakeholders noted that
efforts made by EU banks to assess and manage ESG risks have increased
over recent years but still need to be amplified. A common European
framework on the incorporation of ESG risks in banks’ risk management and
transition planning will help in that regard and enhance the resilience of the
banking sector. Efforts to give institutions clarity on the expectations
substantiating the CRD requirements before setting out the implications in
terms of supervision are appreciated. A wide range of views was nonetheless
expressed on several issues and whether the Guidelines strike the right
balance between ensuring a sufficiently robust and prudent management of
ESG risks and accounting for feasibility considering data and methodological
challenges.
The risk-based approach is supported but the Guidelines are not always
consistent with it, for instance when referring to the EU Climate Law,
measures prescribed by the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate
Change (ESABCC), or the EU Taxonomy.
The blurring of the prudential boundary is evident through the references to
‘objectives’ and ‘targets’ which appear to envisage the decarbonisation or
reduction of institutions’ impact on ESG factors.
We wonder how the EBA conciliates its Guidelines that on the one hand
explain not requiring an objective of fully aligning with Member States or

The EBA has taken note of the comments
received and thanks respondents for their
contributions. Answers to specific issues and
comments are included below.

Guidelines
amended as
described
below.

The risk-based approach involves managing
financial risks stemming from the transition
process towards political objectives including
carbon neutrality. EU climate law, measures
by ESABCC and ‘targets’ are explicitly
mentioned in CRD. See below for EU
Taxonomy and amendments to section 4.1.
The Guidelines do not require to align
portfolios but to measure and monitor the

Section 4.1
amended.

Risk-based
approach

Alignment with
EU objectives

Section 4.2
clarified.

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Transition
finance

ESG risks as risk
drivers

Level of
prescriptiveness

Union sustainability objectives or one specific transition trajectory (i.e., a
1.5°C or NZE objective), and on the other hand the requirements on portfolio
alignment.
Where the EBA does believe that it is relevant to cite external political
objectives and targets, it should clearly explain how institutions should
consider alignment/misalignment in relation to their own planning and the
risk implications.
The Guidelines should ensure that risk management strategies and plans
help to support transition finance. Banks should be expected to develop a
strategic perspective on capturing and supporting opportunities that arise in
the transition, consistently with EU legal frameworks, but also to mitigate
long-term risks arising from lack of climate action.
The EBA rightly considers ESG risks as risk drivers of traditional risk types and
not as a separate risk type.
This approach is however not consistently applied in the Guidelines where
certain requirements suggest that ESG risks should be treated as a separate
risk category.
Not prescriptive enough. The Guidelines remain too principle based. The
flexibility left and the lack of detailed requirements will undermine the
quality of the exercise and could lead institutions to develop a purely
administrative exercise to justify not changing their approach to manage ESG
risks. We recommend EBA to provide additional minimum safeguards and
clarifications on the practical implementation.
Too prescriptive. The Guidelines should adopt a principles-based approach.
The consultation paper sometimes takes an overly prescriptive approach
that does not account for challenges faced by banks and would
constrain the institutions’ learning curve on ESG risks.
Sufficient flexibility should be left - and maintained over time – with regard
to: methodologies and use of proxies; risk mitigation tools; engagement with
counterparties; data sourcing and gathering; indicators, metrics and targets

degree of alignment as an input to strategy
and risk management decision-making in
relation to climate transition risks.

The Guidelines require to consider ESG risks Section 6
when formulating and implementing amended.
business strategies. The section on plans
refers more explicitly to transition finance.
The definition of ESG risks provided in CRR
applies throughout. To ensure that banks
properly assess impacts of ESG risks on
financial risk types, additional processes or
modifications to existing processes are
needed and detailed in the Guidelines.
The EBA has considered the range of views
received on the level of prescriptiveness of
the draft Guidelines. The EBA recalls that its
mandate is to specify minimum standards,
criteria and methodologies for the
identification, measurement, management
and monitoring of ESG risks. Delivering on
this mandate entails providing harmonised
and generally applicable requirements with a
degree of granularity. Given the fact that
management of ESG risks is evolving, the
Guidelines have nonetheless maintained a
degree of flexibility for institutions to
develop their methodologies. Institutions

Sections 4.1,
5.3, 5.5 clarified.

No fundamental
changes.

66

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Time horizons

Scope – scenario
analysis,
disclosures,
capital
requirements

as banks should set their own metrics and targets based on their own
strategies.
The Guidelines should focus on institutions’ achievement of appropriate
prudential risk outcomes rather than over-specifying the means and/or
method by which institutions should identify, measure, monitor and manage
ESG risks. A "demand-based approach" may be considered in which the
objectives are explained to the institutions but the path to their
implementation must be taken largely independently. As another possible
model, we would like to recommend a "solution-based approach". Here, the
tools for assessment and for the management of ESG risks are developed and
explained, even trained and then published by the supervisory authority.
The Guidelines could better distinguish between mandatory requirements
and recommendations for good practices.
The guidelines should reflect on what long term entails for prudential
purposes. It could be clarified that long-term horizon is not expected for
every risk management tool as this would be too excessive and demanding.
The definition of long-term as at least 10 years should be specific to the
climate and environmental elements and for the purposes of prudential
transition plans. Medium and long-term assessments are expected to be
mainly qualitative/ subjective/ expert based so supervisory expectations
should be high level.
Long-term horizon is not consistently applicable across E, S, G risks. More
specifically, given the uncertainty around social and governance factors,
along with the lack of clear long-term goals, long-term time horizons may not
be relevant for S and G risk drivers.
More guidance is needed on how to perform ESG scenario analysis, foster
transparency of institutions’ practices, and ensure that supervision and
enforcement of the Guidelines will be effective.
More support to green investments and/or higher capital requirements for
fossil fuel-related assets held by banks need to be considered in the
prudential framework.

remain responsible for developing business
strategies and for determining the best
combination of risk mitigation tools they will
implement.
The EBA also recalls that Guidelines set
requirements institutions should comply
with, and not good practices.

A sound management of ESG risks should Sections 4.1,
consider the short, medium and long term as 5.5. and 6
required under CRD. However, the amended.
Guidelines clarify that the level of granularity
and quantification of tools and indicators
used by institutions should be higher for the
short and medium term. Long-term time
horizons should at least be considered from a
qualitative perspective and support strategic
considerations.

These comments deal with aspects that are No change
addressed by separate mandates on
incorporation of ESG risks in scenario
analysis, supervision, disclosures (revision of
the Pillar 3 standards) and the prudential
treatment of exposures.

67

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Scope – banking
book and credit
risk

Articulation with
ECB

International
developments /
Level playing
field

The Guidelines should be limited to the banking book and focused on credit
risk, while foreseeing a gradual approach for enlarging the scope to trading
book and other risk types when they become more mature and/or material.
Limited progress has been made on assessing climate-related financial risk
transmission mechanisms for exposures held for trading. Positions held in
the trading book are actively risk managed, held for very short time horizons
and, as such, may not present a very meaningful reflection of how the bank
is exposed to climate-related risk factors. If the trading book was to be in
scope of the final Guidelines, it would be necessary to phase in the
requirements to allow time for solving data and methodological issues.
Banks under direct SSM supervision are already under significant pressure by
the ECB on environmental risks management. The Guidelines should be
articulated with CRD on one hand and the supervisory practice on the other
hand. It is desirable to have a common regulatory and supervisory attitude
towards ESG. EBA and ECB should ensure alignment and clarity of application
of the respective Guidelines.
The framework for ESG risks is still evolving at the international level.
Convergence of EU regulations with international standards is important to
ensure the level playing field and avoid complexity having to comply with
different requirements within the same group for international banks.
Certain stringent requirements may generate unlevel playing field, with a risk
that clients divert from EU institutions to the benefit of non-EU institutions
that are not subject to such requirements.
The treatment and relevance of financial institution transition planning is
currently an area of active discussion and analysis at the international level.
Given that the EBA’s mandate does not require the publication of these
specific guidelines until 18 months following the entry into force of the CRD,
the EBA could use the allowed time to engage with other authorities globally
and work towards a more aligned approach. The EBA could conduct further
consultation on the transition planning element in its draft Guidelines later
to reflect international developments.

ESG risks can affect various financial risk No change
types and banks should ensure a
comprehensive assessment of ESG risks
based on their business model and scope of
activities.
Given
more
advanced
understanding on transmission channels to
credit risk, more extensive requirements are
included on the latter.

The Guidelines have been prepared with all No change
competent supervisory authorities in the EU,
including the SSM. They take into account
supervisory
experience
on
both
shortcomings and progress of banks. The
Guidelines apply to all EU banks and
supervisors.
The Guidelines take into account BCBS No change
principles on climate-related risks and
international developments (e.g. NGFS,
BCBS) on transition planning, to which the
EBA and its members contribute. They
however provide further details as they are
based on the EU legal framework. The EBA
supports international convergence on ESG
risks management and considers that sound
risk management and transition planning
strengthen banks’ business model. Future
updates to the Guidelines may reflect
international developments if needed.

68

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Date of
publication and
date of
application

EU requirements should be interoperable with future international
standards, which may require future revisions to the EU approach.
The EBA states that their intention is to publish the Guidelines towards end
of 2024 and for the application date to be aligned with the application date
of the amended Directive 2013/36/EU. However, the proposed amendments
to CRD only require that the EBA publish these Guidelines within 18 months
from date of entry into force of this amending Directive and do not set
specific timelines for the application date of the Guidelines. We would
question why the EBA is seeking to publish significantly in advance of this
date. Clarification on the application date of the Guidelines would be
appreciated.
Considering the current state of methodological developments and the
numerous regulatory requirements banks will have to comply with the next
few years (notably CSRD), banks will need sufficient time for the application
of the Guidelines. Implementation period of at least two years is crucial,
given the complexity of the topic and its interdisciplinary nature (data, IT,
strategy, risk processes).
Large institutions within the meaning of the CSRD that qualify as SNCIs and
are treated as listed SMEs in the CSRD are only subject to the corresponding
reporting obligations for the 2028 reporting year. This should be taken into
consideration when finalizing the Guidelines.

The EBA has published the Guidelines in
advance of the deadline provided by the CRD
and decided to align the date of application
with the date of application of CRD6 i.e.
January 2026, for most banks. This early
publication ensures clarity over upcoming
requirements and gives time to institutions
to prepare for both the implementation of
new obligations under CRD6 and compliance
with
the
Guidelines.
To
ensure
proportionality and considering other
regulatory developments e.g. CSRD, a oneyear phase-in is provided for the date of
application of the Guidelines to SNCIs (i.e.
application at the latest from January 2027).

Date of
application
delayed by 1
year maximum
for SNCIs.

Question 1: EBA’s understanding of the plans required by Article 76(2) of the CRD, and articulation with other EU requirements
Definition of
Plan(s)

When respondents expressed their direct view on EBA’s understanding, they
nearly all agreed it was an appreciated effort and solid tentative to provide
directions and definition based on CRDVI mandate. Yet albeit appreciated,
many had comments, questions, and suggestions about the definition of
(transition) plan(s) and how many plans should exist and flexibility around it.
Some respondents express their clear preference for focused, risk-based or

The EBA Guidelines use the same language as Background and
per CRD where its mandate originates. To section 6.1
reflect the different but closely related updated.
strategic efforts spanning various EU
requirements, the background now further
clarifies that plans are output of a single
transition planning process which includes all
69

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Articulation with
EU and other
practices

Plans validation

Reference and
pathways
towards EU 2050
objective

Group / SNCIs
scope /
Proportionality

single plans only, while others either appreciate the flexibility of the GLs or
express strong single transition plan views.
Regarding the articulation with CSRD/CSDDD/ISSB/BCBS, answers revolve
around three clear and complementing points on that matter:
- (further) Clarification needed overall
- The absolute necessity of (more) alignment and consistency with
CSRD (and CSDDD and ISSB to a lesser extent) with another clarification sought on articulation and feeding directions between plans.
- Avoiding overlaps between requirements and create complementing
frameworks.
A few respondents asked for supervisors’ validation of plans, mostly through
SREP while one respondent would prefer less formality.

Respondents raised antagonistic views spanning ‘no pathway – no alignment
– no need to align as it is risk choice’ to improved and inclusive definition to
explicitly mention EU 2050 objective in definition and/or scenarios or (more)
pathways.
Respondents also raised questions such as:
- Does referring to CSRD suffice to imply that EU 2050 is a target –
some would like it to be more explicit.
- Some see no need to indicate or refer to pathways as this is a risk
document.
Which feeds which: CSRD is expected to feed CRD but CSRD is still evolving.
Some respondents preferred a scope of application at Group level only for a
plan, while others preferred EU entity level and not at Group level or asked
for more clarity overall.
While proportionality is a recurring theme on various subtopics, there are
explicit requests to remove demands for SNCIs or take into account the CRD6
waiver option, and not having to create a plan solely because CSRD
disclosures are needed.

relevant strategic and implementation
aspects.
Linkage with EU disclosure and due diligence Background
frameworks is further recalled in the updated
Guidelines
background
where
the
complementary purposes of the different EU
requirements are stressed.
See also below on section 6 and annex.

Supervision of CRD-based plans is out of
scope of these Guidelines. The background
however recalls that banking supervisors will
assess their robustness as part of SREP, as per
CRD6.
The Guidelines stress that they are not
prescribing a specific climate or ESG objective
but require transition planning efforts to take
into account the likely pathways implied by
EU legislation and targets.
See also above on alignment with EU
objectives.

Background
updated

Section 6
amended

The level of application of the Guidelines is Background
aligned with the level of application specified updated
in CRD article 109.
With regard to SNCIs, CRD requires them to
have a plan. It is clarified that in case Member
States decide to use the CRD ‘waiver’

70

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Sectors /
Divesting

provision, the GLs will apply dependent on
the transposition into national law.
Some respondents suggest explicit sectors divesting should be present in the The goal of CRD-based plans is not to force No change
requirements related to CRD-based plans (mostly fossil fuels).
institutions to exit or divest from greenhouse
gas-intensive sectors but to thoroughly
Overall divesting is seeing more cautiously from other respondents given it assess risks and to prepare accordingly
could have some unintended effects.
through structured transition planning,
including by engaging clients and supporting
them where appropriate, notwithstanding
other mitigation actions consistent with
sound risk management.

Question 2: Proportionality approach
Size versus
business model
and risk profile

Cost/benefit

Proportionality seems to be mostly based on institution’ size as illustrated by Size is not the decisive factor in the Background
the Guidelines’ references to SNCIs.
Guidelines, rather the risk materiality clarified
associated with institutions’ activities and
Proportionality is a crucial principle for Pillar II and should be considered business model, in line with CRD art 87(a)(2)
more holistically and not only with regard to the size of the institution. and recognising that smaller institutions are
Proportionality should be better linked to the business model, risk profile of not necessarily less exposed to ESG risks.
a bank and to the level and materiality of the financial risk.
Nonetheless, smaller and less complex
institutions can implement less sophisticated
Smaller institutions may have even higher ESG risks due to less diversified processes given their limited resources.
portfolios and higher sectoral (e.g. agriculture) and/or geographical Some simplifications are thus provided for
concentrations. Hence it would not be sound to reduce or suspend SNCIs and in certain cases also for all nonrequirements for them.
large institutions.
Different institutions have varying capacities and resources. The process of
adaptation to robust ESG risk management could be a significant challenge
for many small institutions.
Proportionality should be ensured regarding the cost/benefit analysis of the A cost-benefit analysis is included in section Section 7.1
measures proposed. The incorporation of ESG-related risks in the prudential 7.1. The benefits of the requirements of the updated
71

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Proportionality
throughout the
Guidelines

SME clients

Scope of
addressees

framework will imply a significant workload for institutions – it is therefore
important that the proposed requirements provide actual value-added both
from an ESG risk management and supervisory perspective.
Proportionality should be applied throughout the Guidelines. A paragraph on
the application of the proportionality principle may be added in Chapter 2
'Subject matter, scope and definitions' rather than only mentioned in the
background.

Guidelines are considered to outweigh costs
given the importance of a sound
management of ESG risks.
The
clarifications
regarding
the Sections 4.1 and
proportionality approach are reflected both 6.1 clarified
in the background and in the main body of
the Guidelines, such as sections 4.1 and 6.1.

Proportionality should apply to all the Guidelines’ requirements, allowing
institutions to focus on the most material risks. The Guidelines should clarify
that all requirements are subject to the materiality principle. If materiality
assessments of ESG risks do not identify material ESG risks transmission
channels from counterparties, requirements such as identification data,
engagement with counterparties, and internal reporting metrics should be
considered in a proportionate manner, regardless of the size of the
institution. Based on this principle, only relevant risk category(ies) i.e. E, S or
G factors should follow the processes indicated in the Guidelines.
Excessively harsh or detailed requirements could entail the risk of ineffective
mechanisms, a resource allocation inconsistent with the effective level of
financial risk, creating a tick box list and/or banks withdrawing from some
sectors hence jeopardizing the supply of credit required for the transition.
The principle of proportionality must extend beyond financial institutions to
encompass their business partners in particular SMEs. SMEs should receive
the necessary support to address ESG challenges without facing financial
penalties or too demanding data collection efforts. Banks’ management of
ESG risks for SMEs should be based only on data to be reported based on
EFRAG’s proportional and voluntary sustainability reporting standards.
A consistency with CSRD and CSDDD would mean that the addresses of the
Guidelines are consistent with those of CSRD, CSDDD. Therefore, the
Guidelines should not address SNCIs in general, but only bigger SNCIs, similar
to CSRD.

Proportionality
cannot
lead
to
a
consideration of whether to implement the
Guidelines
or
not.
However,
the
extensiveness of the various risk
management processes and procedures
should be proportionate to the outcomes of
the institution’s materiality assessment.

The Guidelines do not penalise SME financing Section 4.2.2
and data collection efforts are targeted amended
towards large corporates.
A reference to voluntary reporting standard
for SMEs has been included.
The Guidelines are based on CRD which No change
applies to all institutions, but they embed
proportionality, see above.

72

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Specific business
models

Support for small
institutions

Update
frequency

Identifying
simplifications

The proportionality approach can be further promoted for some types of
institutions with specific business models such as national promotional banks
or institutions that focus on positive ESG-related activities and have lower
exposure to regulatory, transitional and reputational risks. A business model
guided by the principles of the social economy cannot reasonably be
interpreted as "more" prone to risk. It is of utmost importance that such
banks be recognized as such, and that their business model be
acknowledged.
To further support smaller institutions, the EBA should consider providing
more tailored guidance or examples on understanding, defining, and
implementing proportionate ESG risk management practices. Additionally,
facilitating access to ESG data and risk assessment tools could help smaller
institutions meet the Guidelines without disproportionate effort.
The option for small, non-complex institutions to carry out the review of risk
strategies/policies only every two years, as set out in Art. 76 (1) CRD, should
be used.

It is not appropriate for the Guidelines to No change
recognise or distinguish between specific
business models, but proportionality should
apply based on the ESG risk materiality
associated with institutions’ activities.

The simplifications provided for SNCIs aim at Background and
facilitating their implementation of the section 4.2
Guidelines.
amended
See also below regarding access to ESG data.

Proportionality is provided regarding the
frequency of updates of materiality
assessments and plans, for the latter in line
with Art 76(1) CRD.
An annex to guidelines or a synoptic table outlining the facilitations or Simplifications provided for SNCIs are
simplifications granted to SNCIs would be helpful in providing an overall view outlined in the background.
of the simplifications applied in line with the proportionality principle.

Section 6
clarified

Background
amended

Question 3: Consideration of climate, environmental, and social and governance risks
General
comments

Stakeholders broadly supported the Guidelines’ approach i.e. the emphasis
put on E while including some general requirements on S and G risks. There
is wide recognition that most progress has been achieved on climate-related
risks in the financial sector and this should be reflected in the requirements.

Overall the Guidelines maintain the emphasis Section 4.2
put on environmental risks, while still amended.
containing minimum requirements for social
and governance risks.

Two conflicting views have however been expressed:
- A first category of respondents considers that a more comprehensive
approach is needed and further guidance would be justified on nonclimate aspects. S and G are also sources of financial risk and affect

A restricted scope on E would not be in line
with the CRD provisions. However, the
Guidelines recognise that approaches for
social and governance risks are expected to
73

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

CSRD and CSDDD

More support
needed

banks’ counterparties. The full spectrum of ESG factors is captured
by frameworks such as CSRD, SFDR, SASB materiality mapping or the
UN SDGs. More guidance is needed on how to approach social risks
for specific customer segments or industries.
- A second category of respondents on the other hand called for an
even more gradual and phased approach, starting with environmental considerations and in particular climate aspects. This would reflect the maturity level reached on various dimensions (e.g. data,
methodologies) and their specificities (e.g. differences in transmission channels, time horizons, systemic nature of E versus idiosyncratic nature of S and G). The Guidelines should focus on climate and
provide flexibility regarding management of S and G risks, with no
mandatory KRIs and only qualitative requirements. They could further capture non-climate aspects at a later stage e.g. in future updates when analytical and operational challenges are addressed.
The Guidelines could further build on CSRD. CSRD will result in more data
available on all ESG aspects and also addresses risk management processes
and strategies. The data that will be reported by counterparties should be
the foundation of banks’ approach to social risks. CSRD also defines ESG
factors as opposed to CRD. CSDDD refers to violations of rights and
prohibitions included in international human rights agreements, with a long
list of human rights and fundamental freedom conventions. The Guidelines
could add that banks should pay attention to any risk deriving from the
violation of legal duties established to pursue social goals in force at national
level, in the jurisdiction of the client.
It would be useful to shape an internationally agreed roadmap for the
gradual integration of social and governance factors towards quantitative
measures.

be gradually enhanced in line with regulatory
and methodological progress.

Further alignment with CSRD has been Section 4.2.
ensured for instance in terms of data items amended
institutions should collect.
The Guidelines require banks to take into
account adherence of counterparties to
applicable social standards, in line with those
mentioned in CSRD.

Such initiative would be welcomed by the No change
EBA.
The EBA is not necessarily best placed to do
that, however developments on supervisory
The EBA could consider developing a common risk taxonomy across ESG risk reporting are ongoing and the final
areas, including a taxonomy of nature related risk drivers.
Guidelines further refer to nature-related
risks (see below).
74

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Nature related
risks – caution
needed
Nature related
risks – need for
more
requirements

Scope of E risks

Interactions
between E, S, G
– conceptual
comments
Interactions
between E, S, G suggestions

Greater distinction should be made between climate and non-climate
aspects such as biodiversity, given the different maturity levels in the
understanding, measurement and management of associated financial risks.
Assessment of nature-related financial risks can already be done. The
financial sector is vulnerable to destabilising impacts of environmental
changes, scientific evidence is available (IPBES assessments), half of world’s
GDP is highly dependent on nature, and key sectors and companies have
been identified as high-risk e.g. for deforestation. There are gaps in
management and disclosure of nature-related risks and opportunities by
financial institutions, and a need to integrate further forest and water related
risks in strategies. More recommendations on nature related risk
management should be included in the Guidelines, starting with
deforestation and/or building on first publications available (NGFS, TNFD,
SBTN). An integrated approach is needed given the climate-nature nexus.
We understand that ecosystems degradation and biodiversity loss may be
only examples of a broader range of elements, which leaves a certain degree
of uncertainty. For example, would institutions be expected to include water
and pollution matters in heat maps?
ESG issues are interconnected and should be considered holistically, by
considering macro trends and the entire production chain of economic
activities e.g. for electric vehicles.
The green transition can have both positive and adverse effects on social
issues.
No guidance. It is difficult to provide generally applicable guidance on how
to deal with interactions. Interdependencies between E, S, G risks would be
best considered by institutions in individual risk assessments rather than
through general requirements in the Guidelines.
More guidance. The EBA could provide further guidance on how to handle
interactions and/or illustrations on how to do it.
Limited guidance. The Guidelines could specify that banks should understand
interconnections between various dimensions and consider them in risk
management practices.

The Guidelines require quantification of
climate-related
risks
and
proper
understanding of nature-related risks.
The Guidelines have been amended to
further explain the relevance of naturerelated risks - covered by the definition of
environmental risks in CRR - in the
background as well as to clarify requirements
in terms of materiality assessment and risk
measurement methodologies.

Background and
section 4.2.1
amended
Section 4
amended

Environmental risks are defined in CRR. No change
Institutions should take into account a broad
range of E factors.
See below regarding clarifications provided No change
on interactions.

The Guidelines include a new paragraph Section
4.2.1
which states that with regard to the amended
interactions between the different categories
of, respectively, environmental, social and
governance risks, institutions should apply an
approach that firstly assesses each category
of risk taking into account its specific
characteristics, before considering potential
interconnections. This should prevent the
75

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

risk that institutions would mix or offset risks
Banks should avoid using aggregated scores for ESG and focus separately on of various nature and magnitude.
each dimension to avoid black boxes or mixing risks of various nature and
magnitude. Employing a differentiated approach is needed to take into
account the different inherent characteristics of each category of risk

Transition plans

Para 26 - Double
materiality

Using the Taxonomy DNSH criteria – e.g. assessing if counterparties meet
these criteria - can help to assess and mitigate risk across various
environmental objectives.
The integration of social and governance risks in transition plans is not clear. Requirements on plans are focused on
climate risks but other E and S&G risks cannot
Banks should take a holistic approach rather than siloed with separate plans be ignored, in line with CRD.
for different risks. In particular, one single plan for both climate and nature
would be justified.
Not for the Guidelines. Double materiality is relevant for sustainability The Guidelines are focused on financial
reporting but not for micro-prudential risk management. We recommend materiality in line with CRD but clarify that
that the Guidelines refer to financial materiality only since they are focused adverse impacts should be taken into
on risk management. The last sentence of para 26 – i.e. conditionality on account to the extent that they can drive
financial risks – should be mentioned in the core text of the Guidelines, not financial risks and/or reputation, litigation
only in the background.
and business model risks.
Need for more recognition. Double materiality should be recognised more
clearly and integrated throughout the Guidelines, in line with CSRD
approach.
Targeted clarification. The Guidelines strike a good balance but could further
clarify how (adverse) impact that a counterparty may have can entail
financial risks for institutions, for instance through a range of risk categories
including strategic, litigation and reputation risks.

No fundamental
change but
section 6
clarified
Background
clarified

Question 4: Materiality assessment

76

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

General
comment

Flexibility

Significance of
activities,
services and
products

Quantification

The materiality assessment is a key exercise as an inadequate assessment
would undermine the adequacy of the risk management approach as a
whole. The conclusions of the EBA monitoring exercise on the IFRS9
implementation serve as evidence for the need of such guidance, as the EBA
has identified largely divergent practices of banks when handling forwardlooking information for risk assessments.
Not enough. Guidance should not be too prescriptive (one size fits all) and
should enable some flexibility on how to approach materiality assessment as
banks may have developed other internal indicators to identify
homogeneous exposures in terms of ESG (e.g. as an alternative to proposed
activities, services, products segmentation). Individual institutions should
have greater flexibility to assess the materiality of ESG risks in their specific
portfolios and across their sectoral exposures.
Too much. The expectations for the execution of the materiality assessment
should be better specified completed with minimum safeguards to improve
the reliability of the exercise. The introduction of qualitative/quantitative
thresholds would be useful.
There should be further clarification on how materiality and how the
significance of activities, services, products should be measured. The
significance of activities, services and products could be determined through
measurable indicators.
§14b should clarify that the activities can be considered as most significant
not only from the perspective of their relative size in the portfolio but most
importantly from the perspective of the potential of these activities to
generate substantial impacts for instance in terms of reputation.
It should be clarified, when referring to the quantitative view to capture
potential impacts of ESG risks, that it should not necessarily be a capital or
P/L impact. Rather, the quantitative view may be supported by the
determination of the amounts of exposures and revenues that are
significantly exposed to the said risks. Clear differentiation should be
promoted between the assessment of risks (using qualitative and

Robust materiality assessments are key and Section 4.1
positioned as starting points for sound ESG amended as
risk management approaches.
explained below

The Guidelines strike a balance between No change
providing minimum standards and criteria
and maintaining the responsibility of banks to
conduct materiality assessments that
correspond to their business model and risk
profile. The Guidelines do not specify
thresholds but require banks to document
their methodologies including any threshold
used. See also below on question 5.

It has been clarified that institutions should Section 4.1
ensure that the scope of their materiality clarified
assessment sufficiently reflects the nature,
size and complexity of their activities,
portfolios, services and products. Institutions
should document their methodologies
including indicators.
It has been clarified that the determination of Section 4.1
material ESG risks should consider both their amended
impacts on financial risks categories and the
amounts of exposures or revenues exposed
to the risks.
Quantitative information should be used at
least for environmental risks.
77

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Asset class
versus sector
and geography

E, S, G

quantitative views) and risk quantification/measurement (which should be
based on a capital or liquidity impact).
For some aspects there are no established calculation methods for
quantifying, therefore the guidelines should enable qualitative assessment
where appropriate.
A sectoral and geographic classification of portfolio exposures should be
required as part of the materiality assessment of climate-related risks.
Reversely, the traditional classification per asset class should be discouraged,
as the portfolio vulnerabilities to climate and transition risks depend on the
sectors and geographies.
E, S and G materiality assessments should not be under similar requirements.
Guidelines should include a reference to nature-related transition and
physical risks.

Clarification on
materiality
assessment
perimeter
Time horizons

Materiality
assessment

Guidelines should clarify if portfolio/exposures are encompassed in activities
as per §14b?

It has been further clarified that sectoral and Section 4.1
geographic location information should be clarified
taken into account as part of materiality
assessments.
More detailed requirements are included for
E risks. The Guidelines have been amended to
refer to exposures towards sectors highly
dependent on nature and ecosystem
services.
The Guidelines clarify that portfolios are
encompassed in activities.
The transition risk assessment should take
into account exposures’ vulnerabilities to
relevant jurisdictions’ objectives.
See above regarding the clarifications
provided in paragraph 19 and below for the
ICAAP section of the Guidelines.

Guidelines should clarify the materiality assessment for non-UE exposures. It
is proposed that it is circumscribed in terms of transition risk.
The materiality assessment for the time horizon proposed (including at least
10 years) is too long to be used for financial resource planning: liquidity
assessment (including stress testing & planning) focuses on short to medium
term risks, making it difficult to cater for long term events; while a capital
assessment focus (including stress testing and planning) beyond 5 years
would not be meaningful.
The business model of a bank when determining the length of the forecast
horizon for assessing the materiality of ESG risks should be considered.
Long-term time horizon of the materiality assessment should increase to 20
years or minimum of 25 years to align with transition planning.
Guidelines should elaborate further on the relationship, synergies and The Guidelines have been amended to refer
differences between the materiality assessment as required under CSRD and to consistency with CSRD and further align

Section 4.1
amended

Section 4.1
clarified

Section 4.2 and
section 5.4
amended

Section 4.1
amended
78

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

consistency with
CSRD

Double
materiality

More guidance

Divergence of
counterparties
from transition
objectives

EFRAG guide and the materiality assessment as required in the EBA
guidelines. Guidelines should enable reusing materiality assessment
performed under CSRD. Definitions of time horizons should be consistent and
Guidelines should clarify if severity in §15 is the same as in the ESRS (1§45).
§15 likelihood and severity of the materialisation of the risks should be
replaced by likelihood of occurrence and the potential magnitude of the
financial effects; to align with CSRD/ESRS
Pros
Banks should also assess how their activities can do more good and less harm
to the environment in order to mitigate risks that can be amplified in the
financial system. Guidelines should include requirements on engagement
with affected stakeholders or their representatives and the assessment of
the impact of ESG risks on people and the environment.
Cons
Guidelines should clarify that their focus is on financial materiality and the
management of financial risks to the institution only. It would help banks to
deepen their analysis and efforts where the risks are material, in a consistent
manner with the risk-based approach.
More detailed guidance or best practice would be welcome on: likelihood
regarding ESG risks; the number and/or which scenario to be used under
§14c including their time horizons and if different scenarios should be
considered across time horizons; how counterparties are considered “most
critical”.
Assessing the divergence of counterparties from transition objectives is too
prescriptive, too broad for a bank wide materiality analysis and assumes an
unproven correlation between transition recalcitrance and the counterparty
risk. Institutions should be given the flexibility including making their own
judgements as to whether counterparty divergence from transition
objectives is a relevant factor. Banks should not have to rigidly refer to a
counterparty’s alignment with different net-zero pathways to quantitatively
assess financial risk.

with CSRD and EFRAG implementation
guidance on the financial materiality
assessment, including regarding terminology.
Wording of former paragraph 15 has been
aligned.

The Guidelines are focused on financial Background
materiality in line with the nature of the CRD clarified
but clarify that adverse impacts should be
taken into account to the extent that they
result in financial risks and/or reputational,
litigation and business model risks.

It has been clarified that likelihood refers to
likelihood of occurrence, in line with CSRD.
The EBA will develop further Guidelines on
scenario analysis. The reference to most
critical counterparties has been removed.
The degree of alignment or misalignment of
portfolios with jurisdictions’ regulatory
objectives is an input to materiality
assessment in particular given its relevance
to transition planning.

Section 4.1
amended

Section 4.1
slightly
amended

79

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Link with
transition
planning
S and G

Redrafting
proposals

Frequency

ICAAP

Materiality should always be a relevant driver for the transition planning
obligations (i.e., sectors that are not material for the institution’s business
model and/or capital should not be part of the transition plan).
Guidelines should allow banks to carry out their materiality assessment in a
way that is proportionate given the lack of clarification from the
legislator/regulator on the risks to be precisely regulated. Due to missing
social taxonomy, limitation of the use of S and G data should be more
emphasized.
• General: Guidelines should refer to ESG risk drivers rather than ESG
risks
• §14. With a view to comprehensively capturing the material potential
impacts of ESG risks
• §14a. The consideration and use of both qualitative and quantitative
elements and data where these are available
• §14c should clarify further that the banks should first explore the key
propagation channels of climate impacts and transition impacts for
the bank, per sector and country of activity of their counterparties,
based on a range of information (including forward-looking information such as a range of scenarios).
• §15 should include “expert” assessment when considering long term
horizon.
Reduced frequency of materiality assessment for SNCI is appreciated.
Guidelines should set a 3-year frequency in line with SREP guidelines.
More generally, materiality assessment frequency should be on an ad hoc
basis, when significant changes have occurred is more relevant.
§18 should be completed to clarify that the banks should justify how criteria
are weighted relatively to each other. They should also document how they
address the data gaps. The corresponding decisions with respect to the
treatment of ESG risks should also be clearly documented, alongside the clear
internal definition of materiality, which is already required in the ICAAP
framework for all risks relevant to the institution.

Transition planning should address material Section 4.1.and
ESG risks.
section 6
clarified.
See above regarding E versus S and G.
No change

ESG risks is the term used in CRR.

No change

Comprehensive assessment is important.

No change

No change – but limited to E risks.

No change – but
limited to E risks.

The suggestions are considered to be No change
captured by the Guidelines.

See response on time horizons.

No change

The minimum 2-year frequency has been No change
kept for SNCIs. Institutions can rely on past
assessments but should ensure they remain
valid as part of regular reviews.
It has been further clarified that banks should Section 4.1
substantiate
and
document
their clarified.
assessments and methodologies, including
thresholds and conclusions.

No change
80

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Disclosure

Guidelines should clarify whether the execution of the reference
methodology should be formally in line with the internal mechanisms already
established regarding ICAAP or should refer only to the materiality of such
ICAAP mechanisms. Additionally, it should be further clarified how to
entangle these material assessments with other materiality assessments
conducted by institutions, i.e., whether one or the other (or both) should
cross-reflect the risk identified in each assessment.
Transparency and credibility are key in materiality assessments. Guidelines
should include requirements for banks to conduct third-party review and
consultation and to disclose all details regarding its methodologies,
processes and results.

The ESG risks materiality assessments should
be consistent with and integrated into other
assessments such as those made for ICAAP.

Disclosure is out of scope of these Guidelines No change
and covered by other regulations (e.g. Pillar
3, CSRD).

Question 5: Presumption of materiality for E and assessment of physical, S and G risks
Minimum set of
exposures (pros)

Support to the general approach in §16, which is consistent with the climate The Guidelines have been amended to Section 4.1.
benchmark regulation and Pillar 3 template 1. However, this wide approach include a reference to exposures towards amended
should be completed by a more targeted focus on a few critical sectors, coal, fossil fuel sector entities.
oil, gas. These sectors alone are influential enough to derail the Paris
Agreement and the EU climate law. In addition, this will ensure more
consistency with the CSRD. In particular exploration of new fossil fuel
reserves represents high transition risk.
Care should be given to the justification provided for the purpose of §17. It It has been clarified that conclusions, Section 4.1
is necessary to maintain the requirement for the bank to explain when it including non-materiality ones, should be clarified
considers that these sectoral exposures are non-material.
substantiated and documented.

Use of taxonomy
(pros)

Guidelines should further specify and extend the list to account for naturerelated risks as well. In the identification of such sectors, it should be built on
the extensive body of existing evidence (in particular, key sectors and
companies have been identified as potentially high risk for deforestation).
Taxonomy is a good proxy as it means the exposure meet the EU
sustainability goals. Yet, the derogation provided in §17 may imply negative

The Guidelines have clarified that nature Section 4.1
degradation and dependencies on ecosystem clarified
services should be considered.
See below regarding the deletion of the Section 4.1
reference to taxonomy-alignment as a proxy amended
81

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

consequences as it does not provide strong guarantees and could benefit to for justifying derogation to presumption of
oil/gas/coal mining exposures (e.g. high level of alignment is not clearly materiality.
established). “Such as” and “high level of [EU taxonomy] alignment” does not
strictly provide mitigation to this derogation. Alignment with taxonomy
should be 100% otherwise sectors could include activities that do not meet
the DNSH criteria hence bear transition risk. The derogation should be
complemented by a second criteria consisting in 100% of the sector/activity
exposure to DNSH taxonomy criteria.
Taxonomy may be used in combination with additional tools (e.g., CPRS,
corporate emissions, elements of corporate transition plans) given the lack
of information on Taxonomy performance, especially for SMEs.

Non-UE
exposure
treatment

'Transitional' activities should be excluded from the derogation in §17 as
medium-to-long-term transition risks carried by associated sectors remain
high.
Guidelines should provide flexibility for group institutions based outside the See below regarding taxonomy-alignment
EU managing activities outside the EU, such as referring to local taxonomy.

Section 4.1
amended

Making sole reference to the EU Taxonomy as a proxy for non-materially
would also pose significant extraterritorial effects for banks with presence in
third countries.

Minimum set of
exposures (cons)

EU taxonomy will not be useful for banks with material exposure outside of
EU or a portfolio composition with a potential lower share of eligible assets
for GAR calculation. Voluntary or internally well justified green assessment
should be likewise used for justification, or the materiality assessment will
not allow for level playing field with respect to exclusion of exposure as
materially affected.
More flexibility should be provided as for the sectors to be included in the Institutions
should
conduct
robust Section 4.1
materiality assessment. Do not support that exposures should automatically materiality assessments that reflect the amended
qualify as materially subject to environmental transition risks on the basis of nature, size and complexity of their activities.
82

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

their sector (§16). This would imply a significant data and assessment burden
even when it is qualitatively obvious that the NACE sector in question poses
no environmental risks to the firm. The reversal of the burden of proof makes
the risk inventory de facto absurd.
Materiality categorisation can be applied e.g. per risk type and only when
certain quantitative/qualitative materiality thresholds are reached. The
categorisation of certain sectors as material does not automatically mean
that they are material from an institution's perspective. Materiality for
institutions depends, among other things, on the business model, risk,
concentrations, maturity of the loans, the willingness/possibility of debtor to
shift its business model, whether the sector itself has the possibility to
decarbonize etc. Therefore, para. 16 and 17 should be removed, and the
approach to materiality assessment should be left to the discretion of the
institutions.
The financial materiality and risk-based approach of the prudential
framework is not necessarily consistent with a purely sector-based approach.
Other complementary factors will determine the financial materiality of an
activity such as the time horizon, the size of the exposure, the existence of
mitigation mechanisms, effective transition paths or dedicated financing that
are in line with an efficient transition, and stress assumptions. While close
attention is given to high-emitting sectors, the materiality assessment should
be commensurate to the size, business activity and types of risks carried by
the institution.

The final Guidelines have removed the
presumption of materiality for certain
sectors considering the limitations of
automatically classifying all exposures
towards certain sectors as material.
However, the Guidelines require institutions
to thoroughly assess material ESG risks by
taking into account a set of criteria and
exposures, including their exposures towards
sectors that highly contribute to climate
change, with particular consideration given
to exposures towards fossil fuel sector
entities. Institutions are responsible for
conducting their assessments and should
substantiate
and
document
their
conclusions,
including
non-materiality
conclusions.

Sectoral approach including all activities listed in Sections A to H and Section
L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2106 is too broad (e.g. insufficient
differentiation at the level of NACE code 1), especially if including the level of
granularity as NACE 2-3-4 digits and does not take into account the
specific/idiosyncratic client’s situation. This presumption will impose a
disproportionate documentary and audit burden on banks to establish that
83

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

the exposure is not material. There will be many exemptions if classifying all
listed sectors per se as materially subject to environmental transition risks.
The list should be illustrative instead of a mandatory. There is also the risk
that there is no incentive to investigate exposures to sectors not covered by
the predefined list.

Use of taxonomy
(cons)

The list of sectors is not aligned with sectors covered by NZBA targets. This
approach is also inconsistent with the list of sectors provided by the
International Energy Agency (IEA) for their Net-Zero Emissions (NZE)
scenarios, well-recognised and adopted globally, as the activities in sections
E, F and G are not included in the IEA NZE.
The reference to the EU Taxonomy for the exclusion of some sectorial
activities should be removed: assessing Taxonomy alignment even when it is
clear that the exposure is not relevant and/or immaterial is too burdensome;
high level of alignment is too ambiguous; taxonomy-eligible portion in the
banking book is very small as benchmarks have shown for many banks.

In light of the removal of the presumption of Section 4.1
materiality for certain sectors and the amended
limitations of taxonomy-alignment from a
financial risk assessment perspective, the
paragraph outlining derogation options has
been deleted.

The mere alignment to the EU taxonomy does not directly imply less ESG risk
as the EU taxonomy regulation classifies the activities as green not from a
risk-based perspective and the EU Taxonomy framework is not designed as a
risk management tool. There is to date no evidence of a generalized positive
risk differential according to green vs. brown features of counterparty
activities.
EU Taxonomy does not have a full coverage of all activities, some
counterparties are not subject to it due to their sizes, there are products
outside the taxonomy (e.g. SLN) with objectives to facilitate/enhance
counterparties’ transition efforts that are not captured by the taxonomy. The
taxonomy operates as a classification tool at the activity level, not at the
sectoral level.

84

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Similar
requirements for
S, G, physical
(cons)

Similar
requirements for
S, G (pros)

Similar requirements should not be provided: social and governance risks are
not comparable as a transmission channel of financial risk to environmental
risks. It would be disproportionate to include them in the same manner.
Social and governance risks are more related to client-idiosyncrasy. Trying to
build a risk-assessment system or metrics for governance or social risks
would be extremely burdensome and would not be supported by a
cost/benefit analysis.
Given the difficulties stemming from the identification of transition risk, it is
unclear that a similar approach would provide better results on other type of
risks (physical, social, governance). The materiality assessment for social,
governance, biodiversity risks should be done on a best effort basis at this
stage.
Guidelines should provide similar approach / requirements by consistently
requiring 1/ use of qualitative and quantitative data, 2/ a risk-based approach
to take into account likelihood and severity of the materialization of the risks.

The Guidelines contain more detailed No change
requirements for the materiality assessment
of E risks.

The risk-based approach outlined in No change
paragraph 13 of the final Guidelines applies
to ESG risks. Quantitative information is only
required for E.
Guidelines should provide equivalent requirements for biodiversity risk, in A reference to nature degradation and Section 4.1
particular deforestation. Biodiversity loss and deforestation pose significant ecosystem services has been included.
amended.
environmental risks and have far-reaching social and governance
implications, including impacts on local communities, indigenous rights, and
supply chain integrity. Nature-related risks financial impact on individual
banks has been well-documented.
Guidelines should provide a minimum set of exposures to be considered as The materiality assessment should be Section 4.1
material for each type of risk - environmental (E), social (S), and governance supported by a mapping of ESG factors and amended.
(G). However, it is essential to recognise that materiality may vary depending transmission channels to financial risks.
on the context and nature of each financial institution's operations.
Guidelines should extend the list to sectors A to U, as they involve risks from The list of sectors identified as highly No change
third parties (data processing including data centers, information and impacting climate change relies on EU
communication) on the physical, social and governance risks sides.
regulation.

85

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Similar
requirements for
physical suggestions

Guidelines could refer to minimum set of asset classes to be considered (eg,
secured by property) as well as to publicly available registers of natural
hazards, which institutions should use in order to exclude exposure from
minimum set.
Areas and sectors at high risk of drought, flooding, marine submersion, water
stress, soil erosion etc. (alone or combined) should be considered a priority
for materiality.
Public actors are making efforts to identify the key risk exposures in Europe;
as illustrated by the EEA’s European Climate Risk Assessment report. A
possible way to integrate this as part of the present guidelines is to require
that the banks update their list of mandatory material exposures on physical
risks continuously according to public recommendations.
A minimum list of physical risk hazards that are generally considered as
"material" by geographical area - in example NUTS3 level would be helpful
for the institution to evaluate the coverage of its own physical risk
assessment framework.

The Guidelines require institutions to take Section 4.1
into account the geographical areas in which amended
key assets of counterparties or physical
collateral, in particular for real estate
exposures, is located. There is no mandatory
list of exposures for physical risks, but
institutions are responsible for conducting
robust assessments by using both qualitative
and quantitative information and considering
a sufficiently large scope of environmental
factors. Institutions may use information
stemming from EEA reports to support their
assessments.

Question 6: Data processes
List of items to
collect under
§23a (pros)

Strong support to list in point 23 the information that should at least be
gathered when assessing the current and forward-looking ESG risk profile of
counterparties. Points i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, ix of the list are particularly relevant to
assess the ESG risk profile of counterparties.
Some data points should be made more prescriptive:
• Current and forecasted greenhouse gas (GHG) scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions in both absolute and intensity terms.
• Investment (capex) in fossil fuels, split between investment in existing infrastructures and new ones, and operational expenses (opex)
related to fossil fuel consumption and/or infrastructures. Such exposures bear particularly high financial stability risk.

A minimum list of data points that Section 4.2.2
institutions should consider obtaining or amended.
collecting for large corporates has been
maintained in the Guidelines, with some
adjustments.
The Guidelines align with CSRD/ESRS i.e.
absolute and where relevant intensity.
The Guidelines require to consider
counterparty’s dependency on fossil fuels.

86

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

List of items to
collect under
§23a (cons)

Transition plans

Consistency with
CSRD

Banks should collect some data related to biodiversity. It can start with data
related to deforestation, with data on the dependency to high-risk activities
- both in terms of economic factor inputs and revenue base and the
investment (capex) in such activities.
In case the approach of a minimum requirement list is kept, data collection
in retail banking should be limited to data on climate related factors such as
greenhouse gas emissions (car financing) and energy efficiency (real estate
financing).
Pros
Strong support to the recognition of the counterparties’ transition plans as a
relevant source of forward-looking information for financial institutions’ risk
assessments. Once the transition plans in the non-financial sector are
streamlined and made credible via the assurance function, such transition
plans offer themselves as a credible and comparable source of information,
which should contribute to the convergence of views on transition risk
among financial institutions.
Cons
Do not support the obligation to use data from transition plans to assess
large companies, particularly as there is no obligation to prepare such plans
under the CSRD.
The list of data to be collected from counterparties listed in §23 should be
primarily focused on data being published under CSRD, which has set up an
extensive reporting framework for ESG data that is quite unique at
international level, attempting to calibrate the reporting burden of
companies and the need for ESG data.
Data requirement should not go beyond what is required by CSRD and
further align: emissions targets instead of forecasts, dependence of natural
resources rather than on fossil fuels, risk of litigation not requested by CSRD.
Timing of requirements of the guidelines should be consistent with that of
disclosure under CSRD so banks can build out their data systems to house a
variety of non-financial datapoints from their clients and counterparties.

The Guidelines require to consider material
impacts on biodiversity and related policies.
Institutions should determine which data Section 4.2.2
points they will collect for retail clarified
counterparties by considering the list
provided in the guidelines, which includes
climate related factors.
The Guidelines have kept the transition plans No change
as one of the data points that institutions
should consider given their ability to inform
the forward-looking risk assessment of
counterparties.

Wording has been clarified to refer to plans
disclosed in accordance with CSRD, when
available.
The list of data is focused on data large
corporates will have to disclose under CSRD.
Alignment has been reinforced for example
to refer to targets instead of forecasts.
Although disclosure of litigation cases is not
requested under CSRD, this informs the risk
assessment institutions should perform and
this has been moved to section 4.2.3.
The Guidelines apply from 2026 or, for SNCI,
2027, allowing to make use of CSRD data to a
large extent.

Section 4.2.2
clarified
Section 4.2
amended.

87

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Client
engagement
compared with
CSRD

Flexibility with
respect to data
to collect

Para 24

Guidelines should provide some clarification on the extent to which it is
needed to engage with counterparts beyond the publicly available ESG data
they provide. Client engagement should not be made necessary if primary
data is publicly available under CSRD. Some Member States appear to have
asked financial institutions to limit bilateral outreach to corporates to collect
data and rely as much as possible on data reported from CSRD and from data
providers. This goes against the requirements from the Guidelines to
primarily engage with clients to collect data. Counterparties might face
multiple asks from different banks at a time when they are deploying huge
effort to produce CSRD data.
Data collection may prove to be very difficult, as banks will have to look
through a large number of counterparties with which they can be engaged
with.
The list of data to be collected for large corporate counterparties should be
indicative (or seen as recommendation) only as it does not depend on
materiality analysis and does not include a proportionality approach based
on the type of service offered to these customers.
Counterparty data gathering (including for large corporate counterparties)
should be based upon a materiality assessment of the risk of the
counterparty, ESG risks identified, the type of clients, collateral and
exposures, etc. Data requirements should be determined using a risk-based
approach as some data points are more important to assess risk in certain
sectors.
Guidelines should set a baseline for ESG-related data collection for non-large
counterparties, to ensure a minimal level of data collection across
institutions.
As per the EBA Guidelines on Loan Origination and Monitoring §126,
institutions may conduct portfolio-based evaluations for micro/small
enterprises instead of borrower-specific assessments. This regulation is
sensible as it reduces the burden on micro and small enterprises. Such
approach should be foreseen in §24.

The Guidelines require institutions to build Section 4.2.2
on available ESG data, and to assess which clarified
other sources of data would effectively
support the identification of ESG risks, such
as
information
captured
through
engagement.

The list of data points has been maintained Section 4.2.2
but it has been clarified that institutions amended
should consider obtaining or collecting this
list, with a view to ensuring they have
appropriate information to assess ESG risks.
Data processes should also be developed
taking into account the outcomes of the
materiality assessment, as clarified by
paragraph 17.

Given data availability, the baseline is set for Section 4.2.2
large corporates counterparties, but clarified
institutions should consider the list provided
for those counterparties when determining
data points needed for other counterparties.
See also below on exposure-based method
for SMEs.

88

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para 25

Data gaps

Use of proxies

Guidelines should clarify expectations around the timeframe for reducing
reliance on proxies, and quality assurance for data procured from third party
providers.
Guidelines should ensure the phase-out of proxies to help fill data gaps by
specifying the exact timeline for doing so: 3 to 5 years maximum are
recommended.
More guidance is expected to address data gaps. Data gap may increase for
the banks to assess ESG risks as the EC is proposing to increase the threshold
for corporations to be considered SMEs. It might reduce the scope of the
corporations under the CSRD.
Guidelines should stress that missing data or difficulties resolving gaps
should not discourage banks from integrating these ESG risks and that
institutions should take precautionary measures.
Pros
The use of proxies throughout the guidelines should be revised. The
collection of ESG data is still very challenging, with multiple issues ranging
from comparability of data to coverage of data. Some sections of the
guidelines give the impression that the use of estimated values and proxies
is an inferior method. However, proxies can generally represent a good and
justifiable measure, particularly in the volume business, and need not be
inferior to the quality of raw data. Ultimately, proxies also serve to avoid
overburdening small companies and private customers. The use of proxies
should therefore generally be made possible for all companies.
Cons
Proxies have some limitations such as being difficult to use in risk
management functions; they are based on averages; they consider that all
companies in a given sector are similar or they might have a limited time
horizon.
The use of estimates and/or proxies can only be contemplated as a last
resort, and that both the choice to use them (lack of data or unreliable data)
and the choice of a certain estimate and/or proxy instead of others must be
justified.

No specific timeframe is included in the No change
Guidelines
but
institutions
should
progressively seek to reduce use of proxies
and improve practices and data quality.

The EBA notes that efforts are ongoing to No change
address ESG data gaps in the EU. Institutions
should leverage on these developments and
assess remaining gaps and document
remediating actions.

The Guidelines do not prevent the use of Section 4.2.2
proxies but request institutions to make use clarified
of available data and assess which other
sources may be useful. Proxies can represent
an alternative to raw data in certain cases but
also present limitations which justify efforts
by institutions to seek to gradually reduce
their use.

89

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Guidance and
support needed

Data providers

Clarification
needs

Drafting
suggestions

Guidelines should clarify how institutions should use proxies and estimates
in the case of data unavailability.
Guidance would be expected on which sources or proxies can be used for
social and governance risk.
The data providers are not only used to obtain estimates when data is not
directly available from the counterparts, but also to optimize the collection
of the data from corporates even where those data are publicly available
(avoiding the need for institutions to examine each of sustainability report of
thousands of entities). Hence, using data providers should be left to the
institutions in a consistent manner with the outsourcing framework.
Guidelines should provide that banks rely on the data quality assurance of
the data provider and make that an important criterion in the vendor
evaluation process; the vendor should check the quality of its data and it
should be selected based on data quality.
Requirements to verify the quality of the data will place on banks a
responsibility and a cost of resources that is not proportionate to the role of
the banks: data subject to external audit should be presumed of high quality.
Non-audited data which are provided by the company should also be
presumed to be reliable, except in the case of obvious inconsistency or public
controverses.
Guidelines should clarify how, in what context, for what purpose data from
external parties can be used.
§23aiii. “Material” is not defined and could imply different
assumption/interpretation among financial institutions. Who assesses that
impacts are material? Should it leverage more explicitly on CSRD?
§23aix. “Adaptive capacity” should be clarified, as adaptation is typically used
in the context of climate physical risk, but here seems to refer to company
transition plans. These topics require different datasets, and further
clarification could help avoid confusion.
§20-21-25. The use of ESG risk-related data / ESG data / ESG profile / ESG risk
profile should be harmonized to avoid misunderstandings.

The choice of specific proxies and estimates No change
is the responsibility of institutions who
should document and justify their choices.
The Guidelines have been amended to clarify Section 4.2.2
that institutions should assess which sources clarified
of data would effectively support the
identification of ESG risks. Using data
providers is not prohibited but, in line with
sound governance and outsourcing practices,
when institutions use services of third-party
providers they should ensure sufficient
understanding of the sources, data and
methodologies used by data providers.
Institutions should also have in place
arrangements to assess and improve quality
of data used.

A materiality assessment has to be Section 4.2.2
performed under CSRD. Banks may rely on clarified
that assessment or decide to challenge it. No
change.
Wording has been clarified and ‘adaptive
capacity’ removed.
Wording has been harmonised to refer to Section 4.2.2
ESG risk-related data or ESG data.
amended

90

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

§21. Should be amended so that institutions should be allowed to efficiently
design data processes based on the relevance of business activities in
relation to all risk types and the results of the materiality analysis.
§23 could be amended to avoid the reference to generic statements such as
“Governance practices”, and point to more specific frameworks.
§23.a.i. Regarding the collection of geographical location of key assets, we
recommend that, at a minimum, longitude and latitude coordinates,
addresses, square meters, and building type should be collected.
§23.a.ii. Inconsistency with §94.a. where the metric is in absolute terms only.
Due to known weaknesses of “monetary intensity” it is proposed to reshape
this requirement and make a hierarchy of metrics). The intensity approach,
whether promoted or accepted by SBTi and many industry alliances, does not
reflect the fact that global warming is fed by actual emissions, not intensity,
giving a false impression of progress towards a carbon neutral economy and
making targets easier to reach. GHG emission reduction targets should at
least be expressed in absolute amounts.
§23.a.iii. and v. should be deleted. Institutions and supervisory authorities
are in no position to judge or disincentivize environmental impact, as long as
such impact is legitimate by law and does not constitute financial risk (e.g.
GHG certificate prices) relevant for default risk. The mere fact of resource
consumption, as long as legitimate under the law, does not constitute a
financial ESG risk factor from any institution’s point of view.
§23.a.vi. More specific metrics should be provided as EPC is not yet
standardized.
§23.a.vii. Requirements for institutions should expand to report on their
alignment with specific regulatory and framework disclosures, such as the
CSRD and the Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD).
§23.a.vii. The adherence to voluntary or mandatory climate and
environmental reporting (point vii) will also not say much about the actual
level of ESG risk exposure of the counterparty.
§23.a.viii. The inclusion of litigation risks may not be practical in all cases.
Detailed information on imminent or pending litigation is likely to be

Data processes should be proportionate to
materiality assessments.
Requirements have been amended to align
with the Taxonomy and CSRD.
Banks could decide to collect these data but
the general requirement is to collect data
enabling physical risk analysis.
Guidelines now align with CSRD (absolute
value and where relevant intensity).

Adverse impacts and dependence on natural
resources may result into financial risks.

EPC has been removed.
The Guidelines do not address disclosure
requirements for institutions.
This data item has been deleted.

The assessment of litigation risk should
support the risk identification and
91

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

restricted, and gaining sufficient information to determine the relevance,
impact and likelihood of outcomes from a litigation will prove extremely
difficult. § should be amended to include “where available”. An imminent
litigation risk of the counterparty is likely to be provisioned by the
counterparts. Hence, this consideration may lead to a double counting in the
credit risk associated with this counterparty.
§23.a.ix. Note that CSRD is a disclosure directive and does not require
preparing a transition plan. § should be amended accordingly.
§23.a.x. (new) third party assessments performed regarding environmental
performance, notably credibility and robustness of corporate transition plans.
As transition plan content is highly complex information, leveraging on third
party assessment should be a useful source of information in order to avoid
unnecessary burden.
§23.b.ii. More guidance is needed regarding governance practices. For
instance, different categories of governance practices could be defined. This
would make the assessment of different institutions’ exposures to
governance risk more understandable and comparable.
23.b.iv. should be deleted. ESG risk factors are only to be taken into account
in exceptional cases where local circumstances are such that lawsuits against
institutions or their clients are evidently imminent and could put the
creditworthiness of borrowers at risk. But this is so rare that the wording of
item (iv) seems much too vague to capture it. Moreover, it is already covered
by item (v).
§23.b.i-v. The below should replace current content:
• due diligence procedures to ensure alignment with the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the UN Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights, including the principles and rights set
out in the eight fundamental conventions identified in the Declaration of the International Labour Organisation on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and the International Bill of Human Rights.
(exact text of taxonomy minimum safeguards art. 18)

measurement process. This has been moved
to exposure-based method in section 4.2.3.

Wording has been clarified.
Institutions may decide to collect these
assessments or assess counterparty’s plans
directly.

This requirement has been amended to align
with CSRD and the EU Taxonomy.

This requirement has been amended to align
with CSRD and the EU Taxonomy.

This requirement has been amended as
suggested by the comment to align with
CSRD and the minimum social safeguards of
the EU Taxonomy.

92

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

•

SNCI

CSDDD

Data sources
Data quality

negative material impacts on own workers, workers in the value
chain, affected communities and consumers/end-users (to align with
CSRD ESRS 2 SBM 3 and ESRS S1-S4) including information on due diligence efforts to avoid and address such impacts
Guidelines should introduce an opening clause to allow LSIs or SNCIs to
choose the metrics, with §23.a being used only as an example. SNCI should
be excluded from §23b.
The Guidelines should aim to provide additional guidance to SNCIs with
limited data for their assessment of financial impacts stemming from ESG
factors.
Guidelines should clarify how the data collection requirements relate to the
due diligence requirements laid down in the CSDDD. Social factors and data
on due diligence should be introduced progressively, in consistent manner
with CSDDD, which only covers entities over 1000 employees, and which
includes a review clause of 2 years for the application to financial services.
Institutions may consider below data sources: forests finance, Global Oil Gas
Exit list, ENCORE.
Guidelines should set clear standards for the quality and integrity of the ESG
data collected. This guidance should mirror the specificity found in
frameworks such as the PCAF's guidance on greenhouse gas emissions
ensuring institutions can rely on high-quality, relevant data for risk
assessments and decision-making.

SNCIs should also develop sound data No change
processes but may implement less complex
arrangements in line with the general
proportionality approach.

The requirements in the Guidelines may No change
support the implementation of CSDDD or
leverage on due diligence procedures
performed by counterparties.
Institutions should build on available data No change
and assess data quality.
The Guidelines request banks to review their No change
practices regularly and improve data quality.

Question 7: Measurement and assessment principles
More guidance
needed on S&G
risks
Para. 26a
Single-name
information and
mapping

Excessive focus on environmental issues.
The EBA should provide guidance/requirements in terms of quantification for
social and governance risks.
The EBA should clarify that institutions are expected to use analytical models
that overcome sectoral approaches being able to evaluate single-name
information.

See above regarding the emphasis put on E. No change
Banks should progressively enhance
practices towards quantification for S and G.
A combination of methodologies should be No change
used, including at exposure level.

93

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 26b
ESG risk
concentration

Proportionality
and use of the
three methods
Para. 27
Clarification on
use of three
methods

Specify baseline
criteria ESG risk
measurement

Allow use of
qualitative
instruments
(esp. SME)

Mapping of exposures to individual risk drivers would be extremely
challenging and would represent questionable benefit in terms of risk
management information versus the effort/ cost involved for institutions.
This mapping should be restricted to economically material exposures.
ESG risk concentration is not yet defined in regulation and implies first
identification and evaluation of ESG risk. Ask for flexibility in the
measurement of concentration risk.
Call for a gradual implementation of this approach and to keep consistency
with other concentration risk related initiatives in Pillar 1 and 2.
Support for the broad range of methods.
Request for flexibility/discretion in the use of the three methods and
proportionality in the application of them.
Request for further clarification about which particular methodology
responds to which particular risk management need and how the three
methodologies complement each other, how institutions can use different
methodologies for different portfolios and what are the expectations
regarding forward-looking measurement methods and what are the
differences between portfolio and scenario-based methodologies.

Not every exposure needs to be mapped
against all risk drivers but tools should allow
to assess transmission of ESG risks drivers to
financial risks.
See below regarding concentration risk.
No change

The range of methods has been kept. They
should be applied taking into account the
materiality assessment.
The structure of section 4.2 has been
changed to clarify key principles for
measurement and assessment methods first.
Paragraph 30 specifies how the methods
should be applied for complementary time
horizons and purposes. Portfolio-based
methodologies rely on scenarios but should
be complemented by other types of scenario
analyses, which will be specified by the EBA
in complementary Guidelines.
The integration of forward-looking scenarios, especially concerning The Guidelines specify criteria for exposureenvironmental risks, enables institutions to gauge potential future states and based methods. The EBA will also issue
adjust their strategies accordingly. While the EBA's approach is Guidelines on climate scenario analysis.
comprehensive, an alternative could involve specifying baseline quantitative
criteria for ESG risk measurement to ensure consistency across institutions.
Institutions should be allowed to put more focus on qualitative tools, e.g. Increased flexibility has been incorporated in
questionnaires.
the Guidelines regarding assessment of ESG
EBA should welcome the possibility of using qualitative data, especially for risks for non-large corporate counterparties,
counterparties with limited data (e.g., SMEs).
including use of portfolio-based assessments,
proxies and qualitative data where needed.

No change

Section 4.2
amended

No change

Section 4.2.2
amended

94

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 27
Portfolio
alignment
methodology

Para. 27
Sector-based
approach

Quantification
and probability
of
materialization
Para. 28 KRIs

Para. 29

Instead of (indirectly) obliging SMEs to collect data, all banks and companies
involved should be allowed to use estimated values and proxies. This could
be in the form of portfolio-based assessments instead of borrower-specific
assessments, or sector data.
Portfolio alignment methodologies not considered as relevant, but seen as,
mostly, an artificial level of technical complexity highly model-dependent. To
some extent, one could consider that collective metrics performed at an
economically sound perimeter (such for instance as a value chain or a
sectoral-based perimeter) might bear some relevance. Portfolio alignment
metrics should only complement other approaches.
While portfolio alignment tools are useful to provide the “big picture”, they
cannot provide sufficient granularity alone to inform and shift the decisionmaking process at sector and asset level. For that purpose, sector-specific
analysis is necessary for the key sectors. A key entry point for banks is sectorspecific finance (mortgages for buildings; infrastructure finance; energy
finance; shipping finance, etc).
It is unrealistic to require banks to quantify probabilities and consequences
of environmental risks.
EBA should clarify that both physical and transition risk should be included
and own models should be allowed to be used.
EBA should define specific guidance on what specific KRIs institutions should
establish for the measurement of ESG risks. A KRI-list with examples is useful
(e.g., transition: green asset ratio, scope 1,2,3 emissions, alignment
measures per sector).
Limit KRIs to large corporates (para 23)

See below regarding portfolio alignment No change
methods.

The Guidelines clarify that institutions should Guidelines and
use sector-based methods as part of their section 4.2.3
range of methods.
clarified

Quantification of E in particular climate- No change
related risks is important for sound risk
management. Both physical and transition
risks form part of E.
A list of metrics is included under section 5.7 No change
of the Guidelines and can support institutions
in the determination of appropriate KRIs,
covering a scope of exposures consistent
with the outcomes of the materiality
assessment.
Forward-looking assessment is difficult at this point and building scenario The EBA will issue Guidelines on climate No change
analysis methodology will take time. In future guidelines it would be scenario analysis.
advisable to include specific guidance on how to combine top-down and
bottom-up scenarios.

95

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Due diligence

Asset-level
approach

It would be useful that regulatory expectations around measurement are
framed recognizing those limitations and acknowledging that banks will have
to take simplistic projection assumptions when going beyond three years.
Institutions should commit to performing due diligence to gather
comprehensive data on ESG risks. This involves collecting information
directly from counterparties and utilising data from diverse sources such as
NGOs, governments, and civil society organisations.
EBA should integrate an asset-level approach for activities that bear a
particularly high transition risk, such as fossil fuel extraction facilities, or
fossil-fuel fired power plants

See above regarding clarification provided on
time horizons.
See above regarding data processes.

Section 4.2.2
amended

Asset-level data is mentioned in the section No change
on data processes. See also above on
materiality assessment.

Question 8: Exposure-based methodology
Support

General support for use of the three methods. Support for the requirements
for the exposure-based methodology
Request for
Clarify in paragraphs 30 to 33 that institutions have discretion as to design
discretion for the appropriate methodologies i.e. a principle-based approach.
use of methods
The exposure-based method should be subject to materiality assessment in
4.1.
Use more
The exposure-based method should be complemented by other tools, such
methods
as stress testing, scenario analysis and qualitative assessments.
Para. 30
Integration of ESG aspects into PD modelling is challenging due to data
unavailability, lack of evidence and the potential technical unsoundness,
Concerns about
particularly when considering the long-term impact of E-factors. It would be
mandatory
premature to modify credit scoring or rating models.
integration ESG
It is assumed that banks are not obliged to incorporate ESG risks into their
aspects into PD
rating models, provided that an existing ESG score covers all E, S, and G
modelling
components and is used as a decision criterion during the lending process.
Request for further clarification.
Para. 30
Question if a dedicated DoD definition related to ESG risk drives is needed.
Need for
Introduce a shadow PD factoring in climate-related financial risks.
adjustments in

Exposure-based methods are part of the final
Guidelines.
Institutions should design methods by
complying with the Guidelines and apply
them subject to materiality. See also above
on materiality.
A range of methods is requested including
scenario-based methods.
Institutions should ensure that ESG factors, in
particular environmental factors, are taken
into account in the overall assessment of
default risk of a borrower and, where
justified by their materiality, embedded in
the scoring or rating models.

No change
No change

No change
No change

Modifications in the Pillar 1 prudential No change
framework are out of scope of the
Guidelines. This is covered by EBA report of
96

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

prudential
framework

Para. 30
Use of
scores/expert
judgements
Make
requirements
discretionary
Para. 31(a)(b)
Degree of
vulnerability
On- and offbalance sheet

Para. 31b

Para. 31b
Consideration of
transition plans

The prudential framework should be adjusted to allow for larger weight of
forward-looking assessments.
Introduce pragmatic solution such as the margin of conservatism or a
downturn component.
Give institutions flexibility to rely on existing ESG scores used as decision
criterion in the lending process or expert judgements/overrides.

October 2023 and upcoming reports under
CRR3.

Institutions should design and use tools as No change
specified by the Guidelines. See also
clarification on the assessment of each
category of risk.
Regarding the risk factors and criteria, change “at least’ into “where Where applicable was already included. The No change
applicable” or alike, as the list is not relevant for all exposures and sets method should be applied subject to
requirement regardless of portfolio materiality.
materiality.
Support for consideration vulnerability.
The degree of vulnerability should be No change
Clarify what is meant by ‘the degree of vulnerability’ in 31(a)(b).
assessed by institutions taking into account
Do not limit ‘degree of vulnerability’ to new technical developments (e.g., the factors listed in the Guidelines.
carbon capture projects).
Support EBA’s approach to cover both on- and off-balance sheet activities.
CRD and the Guidelines require institutions No change
Request that this should be made clear through the whole GL.
to have risk management processes
comprehensive and proportionate to the
nature, scale and complexity of their
activities.
The EBA should ensure that GHG-emissions are analysed in absolute and See above – alignment with CSRD.
Section 4.2.3
intensity terms.
amended
Para. 31b should be amended as to clarify that GHG emissions as such are GHG emissions are not a direct predictor of
not a risk driver, as long as they are legitimate under the law, and as long as financial risk but should be taken into
GHG certificate prices do not contribute to the underlying businesses risk of account in the risk assessment.
default.
The analysis should be completed by the level of alignment of counterparties See portfolio alignment method.
with the Paris objectives.
Include scenario analysis in the evaluation of mortgage collateral.
Banks should use scenario-based tools.
EBA should include transition plans and the credibility and robustness of Transition plans are part of the risk mitigating Section 4.2.3
transition plans of the counterparty to mitigate these risks in para. 31b.
factors banks should take into account as clarified
clarified in paragraph 32.
97

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 31c
Difficulties with
inclusion of
supply-chain

Para. 31c

Para. 31d
Maturity

Para. 31e
Risk mitigation

Transition plans/objectives are important and given the drawbacks of the
prudential framework (backward-looking; data limitations etc.), EBA is
encouraged to work with other EU/international supervisors towards a
common baseline approach to transition risk analyses and measurement.
Concerns about the inclusion of the supply chain. Request for clarification of
what is expected. Proportionality of the institutions and the counterparty
should be considered. One respondent asks to only ask broad questions
about the supply chain.
Information required should not go beyond the CSRD. It should be made
explicit that the supply chain is not the responsibility of the bank; reference
is made to the CSDDD where the downstream value chain of financial
institutions is out of scope.
Some respondents note ‘likelihood’ estimation of critical disruptions to the
business model/supply chain would remain complex in the near future and
the supply chain element is too far-reaching and not manageable.
One respondent asks to change ‘likelihood of critical disruptions’ into
‘exposure to critical disruptions’ to maintain flexibility.
Currently there are no market standards or science based initiatives which
provide such reliable impact assessment of biodiversity loss, water stress or
pollution.
Agree to include the maturity.
Clarify that the maturity of the exposure is needed to identify which risks are
relevant for the exposure, depending on their time-horizon of
materialization.
Agreeance that risk mitigation aspects should be carefully considered to
enable transition finance for both transition/physical risk. Especially the
willingness of the customer to transit. Of possible use: client transition plans.
Provide further clarification on the forward-looking element of risk
mitigation opportunities and how this is expected to be embedded as part of
the assessment.

To properly assess ESG risks at the exposure Section 4.2.3.
level banks should understand if the business amended
model or supply chain of the counterparty
could be affected by critical disruptions due
to ESG factors. This is without prejudice to
the application of CSDDD and forms part of
sound risk management. The wording has
been amended to refer to exposures to
critical disruptions.

Banks should gradually develop their No change
practices and benefit from improving ESG
data.
The maturity criteria has been maintained in No change
the list of factors to consider.

Risk mitigating factors including insurance Section 4.2.3
and transition plans are part of the factors clarified
banks should consider when assessing ESG
risks at exposure level, as clarified in
paragraph 32.

98

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 32
Engagement
with small
counterparties

Para. 33
Time horizon S
and G factors
Para. 33
Clarify due
diligence
requirements

Para. 33

It is important that banks who are not in the first line, could deduct the
insured portion of their loans and only keep the residual one when assessing
their materiality.
Difficulties of meeting the requirements in para. 32 re. the engagement with
smaller counterparties to obtain data.
Request for additional considerations and simplifications for SMEs, e.g., to
use portfolio-based valuation methods like in the EBA GLOM, or the use
proxies on portfolio level, expert judgement or data vendors.
Data collection should only be done in the onboarding process to avoid
burden for the bank and SME later. Respect principle of proportionality.
Under no circumstances should the data requirements to be provided to
SMEs exceed those in the reporting standard of the voluntary reporting
standard for SMEs (VSME).
The issues posed around obtaining useful vendor data would make it
necessary for the EBA to clarify and possibly narrow its definition of
counterparty to allow for institutions to be able to fulfil the requirements.
Limit the time horizon for S+G risks to short-term as para. 33 contradicts
para. 27.
The requirements regarding the time horizons are too imprecise and
clarification is requested of what is expected.
Support for the inclusion of social and governance due diligence.
EBA should clarify that the due diligence assessment is limited to borrowers
for whom such procedures are considered essential/suitable for the business
relationship.
More guidance on how the assessment should be implemented.

See above regarding data processes and the Section 4.2
increased flexibility incorporated for non- amended
large counterparties.

The reference to time horizons has been Section 4.2.3
removed in this specific paragraph. See also amended.
above on time horizons.
Institutions should perform due diligence to Section 4.2.3
assess financial risks stemming from S and G clarified.
factors. This should be done by taking into
account outcomes of materiality assessment.

It is not clear how S&G factors would drive prudential risk aside from certain Institutions should assess potential financial Section 4.2.3
severe scenarios – therefore we believe that institutions should be allowed risks linked with S and G factors.
clarified.
to make their own assessment of the relevance of these factors to their risk
management.

99

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 33

Reach out to
universities
Para. 33

Consideration of
social and
governance risk
Para. 33

Include that institutions can consider sector and country risk levels on social
and governance matters as a way to assess exposure when limited
counterparty data is available.
Financial Institutions may seek scientific validation from universities when
developing and using new methodologies on S and G.
There should be global alignment on social/governance aspects, as it cannot
be expected of banks to reach out to all customers separately in different
jurisdictions, or several times with regulation becoming more concrete and
demanding.
The responsibility placed on banks regarding due diligence is excessive and
could lead to different outcomes in different institutions.
The evaluation of a counterparty's social and governance risks should extend
beyond merely checking its compliance with international standards. It
should also encompass an assessment of the effectiveness of the strategies
implemented by the counterparty to mitigate these risks.

When data is not available institutions should No change
follow the steps outlined in the data
processes section.
Banks may decide to do so.
No change
Due diligence on clients is part of banks’ risk No change
management, in line with materiality and
proportionality considerations.

Institutions should assess financial risks Section 4.2.3
taking into account adherence to social and clarified
governance standards.

Question 9: Portfolio alignment methodologies

Alignment with
other European
regulatory
initiatives

Transition risk

EBA should work with other EU supervisory authorities, as well as nonfinancial authorities, to establish a set of scenarios for common use, as well
as encourage further cross-institutional work on the sufficiently granular
regional and sectoral pathways.
Connect the sectoral portfolio alignment guidelines to the PiT distance to the
IEA NZ 2050 scenario disclosed in the Pillar 3 ESG Templates. Profit from
NACE code-level information, to connect the misalignment of exposures to
these sectors, depending on the level of alignment (or non-alignment) of the
relevant exposures to the EU taxonomy.
Alignment only means a lower risk if the economy gradually transforms
towards CO2 neutrality. If this does not happen and the world remains in a
hot house world scenario, sustainable exposures could even be riskier.
The financial impacts analysis should take into account both Net Zero
scenarios and "most probable" scenarios that Banks seek as appropriate in

The EBA will issue Guidelines on climate No change.
scenario analysis. See also below on the
choice of scenarios.
The Guidelines have been kept high-level; the
(mis)alignment may be expressed in terms of
point in time distance in percentage points.

Banks should assess ESG risks based on a No change
range of scenarios. The Guidelines include
portfolio alignment methods as one of the
tools banks should use to assess climate
transition risks, and will be complemented by
100

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

General
Consequences of
misalignment
Para. 34
Focus should be
on sector-level.

Para. 34
Bank’s discretion
in ESG risk
management is
not prescribing
portfolio
alignment
Para. 34
Science-based
methodologies

Consideration of
off-balance
sheet exposures
Para. 35

order to perform sensitivity analysis related to the impacts stemming from
setting Net Zero target strategies when the economy is not moving towards
a Net Zero direction.
Will penalties and/or remediation measures/actions be imposed when the
portfolio's gap from these objectives is significant? In a perspective of
aligning portfolios with the climate target, the regulator could clearly define
the criteria that banks must consider in the loan origination process.
EBA should dismiss portfolio-based methodologies and rather use asset-level
assessment. To some extent sectoral-based metrics could be considered,
leveraging notably on existing transition scenario trajectories and sectoral
objectives. Portfolio-level metrics could encourage to finance climateneutral sectors instead of facilitating the transition.
Either make explicit that portfolio-based methodologies must include sectorbased methodologies, or add a fourth level with sector-based
methodologies.
Absent firm-level net-zero requirements (EU Climate Law holds for Member
States), why should be banks required to factor climate-related portfolio
alignment into their risk management practice? Firms may choose to shift
the composition of their portfolio away from certain exposures/sectors to
reduce transition risk, but they may equally decide to adopt other risk
management strategies that allow them to retain their existing portfolio
balance (e.g. through other hedging strategies).
We recommend specifying that while the banks may choose appropriate
methodologies, these should be science-based. Caution regarding implied
temperature alignment methodologies from third-party vendors, which
should follow appropriate data and model risk management processes.

Guidelines on climate scenario analysis
considering a wider range of scenarios.
The Guidelines do not address supervisory No change
measures but explain how institutions should
consider
insights
from
alignment
assessments.
It has been clarified that the section deals Section 4.2.3
with sector-based methods, portfolio-based clarified
and portfolio alignment methods. In
particular alignment assessments should be
conducted on a sectoral basis.

The Guidelines do not prescribe an alignment Section 4.2.3
strategy. Institutions should decide which clarified
strategy they pursue. Portfolio alignment
assessments should be taken into account in
this process given insights provided into
exposure to climate transition risks.

Focus of the section is not on implied Section 4.2.3
temperature alignment at the institution’s clarified
level but on assessment at the sector level,
including through reference to science-based
scenarios.
EBA should instruct institutions to have internal procedures in place to assess Procedures should be proportionate to ESG No change
their off-balance sheet exposures and, in particular capital market activities. risks associated with different activities.
Supplement the climate portfolio alignment methodologies with the energy Such metric has been added in section 5.7, Section 5.7
supply-banking ratio (ESBR). ESBR compares the underwriting activity of see below on monitoring indicators.
amended
101

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Energy supplybanking ratio
Para. 35a
Reference to
GHG-emissions
only
Para. 35a
1990 base year
not feasible

Para. 35a Financial risks
Para. 35a
Support for S&G
matters

Para. 35b - scope
of paragraph
Para. 36
List of sectors;
range of
comments

banks in two sectors: low-carbon and fossil-fuel energy. It can be used to
monitor the alignment of a bank with an investment trajectory that meets
the Paris Agreement.
Alignment with GHG emissions only could make financial institutions
encounter more difficulty in supporting net-zero transition of hard-to-abate
sectors (triggering financial institutions' divestment), which could hinder the
real economy from achieving decarbonisation.
The reference to the 1990 baseline is not workable for banks (e.g., did the
current group structure exist already in 1990). We also would like to flag that
under the EBA ST "fit for 55" exercise, banks were asked to work on a 2022
baseline. EBA should provide more flexibility. The priority for institutions
should be to develop a methodology of portfolio alignment in relation to the
wider EU target, in order to identify the gap between this target and
institutions’ own portfolios and manage the risk arising from any gaps.
It should be clarified that alignment gaps can be leading directly to financial
risks for the bank.

The Guidelines do not require exit or definancing; alignment assessments can be
used as starting point to focus engagement
on certain counterparties.
The reference to 1990 should be understood
in the context of the EU objective to reduce
emissions at the jurisdiction’s level. It does
not apply to 1990 banks portfolios but to
decarbonisation pathways at EU level.

Section 4.2.3
clarified

Section 4.2.3
clarified

Alignment assessments support climate Section 4.2.3
transition risks and related financial risks clarified.
assessments.
Including S&G could provide more holistic view of sustainability.
It is considered preferable to give institutions No change
For social and governance matters the portfolio based methodology can flexibility to develop their methodologies on
point to social and governance related metrics of SFDR Principal Adverse S and G risks.
Indicators as relevant portfolio level indices.
Please provide more guidance on how to apply the portfolio-based
methodology to social and governance risks.
Clarify whether paragraph 35b only relates to transition risk (i.e. in relation Portfolio alignment assessments are relevant Section 4.2.3
to 35a) and excludes physical risk.
for climate transition risk.
clarified
1. Remove list, as there is a risk of diverting resources from strategic indus- The list of sectors against which portfolio Section 4.2.3
trial sectors such as automotive, aviation, and maritime transport, which alignment assessments should be performed amended
are also essential in terms of defence from a geopolitical perspective.
has been amended to more clearly refer to
2. Take a more neutral approach – i.e. they should not define the sectors to institutions’ portfolios characteristics and
which these methodologies apply, nor the scope within each sector. In- materiality assessment. Institutions that
stead this should depend on institutions’ materiality risk assessment.
disclose alignment metrics under Pillar 3

102

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

3. Need for a common understanding of the sectors which are potentially
subject to higher transition risks.
4. Explain why only the limited list is included.
5. Add sectors (e.g., fossil fuel production; also extended to the entire value
chain (upstream, transformation, storage, refining, processing and distribution)).
6. Align with NZBA sectors.
7. List is not consistent with sectors referred to in para. 72b.
Large institutions Explain what is meant by “large institutions”.
Para. 36
Support IEA approach. Where IEA sets targets in terms of absolute and
Notes on IEA
intensity, both should be considered.
methods
Clarify that the latest updated scenario should be used to prevent the use of
outdated scenarios
Para. 36
1. Allow other scenarios than IEA, like NGFS, NZBA, GFANZ, IPCC sceUse of other
narios.
scenarios than
2. IEA scenarios have limitations (e.g., not specific enough and do not
IEA (flexibility)
take into account national/regional specificities, account for sectors
that are dependent on energy only). No scenarios available for the
agricultural sector nor forestry, nor does it consider land subsequent
nature-based carbon sequestration. More sectoral pathways should
be considered. Also, creates oligopoly situation and undue costs of
smaller banks.
3. EBA should provide guidance on how institutions can account for differences between sectors, countries, and regions (to tackle critique
on IEA scenario). Articulate whether regional scenarios could be considered to distinguish between exposures in (a) emerging markets
and developing economies and (b) exposures in developed countries.
4. Align with GFANZ's best practices on measuring portfolio alignment,
and providing principles-based guidance, such as the Portfolio Alignment Tool key design judgements.

should take into account the minimum list of
sectors included under Pillar 3 requirements.

The CRR definition applies.
No change
Up-to-date scenarios are required. See also Section 4.2.3
below regarding IEA.
amended

The Guidelines have been amended to keep Section 4.2.3
the reference to IEA but as an example amended
among a range of scenario providers. Key
selection criteria (science-based, consistent
with policy objective etc) are outlined in the
Guidelines and institutions should document
their methodological choices.

103

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 36
Representative
samples of
exposures for
SNCI
Para. 36
Explain use of
counterpartylevel data
Para. 37
More
information
requested on
methods.
Para. 37 naturerelated risks
Para. 37
Use of heatmaps

5. The EBA should encourage European banks to voluntarily uptake
Mortgage Portfolio Standard (given that mortgage portfolios are a
material source of climate risk) as part of their strategies to decarbonise their assets and to manage and act upon their ESG risks, and
rely on the NZBA portfolio-level tools. European banks would then
develop emissions metrics using on PCAF to quantify financed emissions, and finally set targets through SBTi.
6. Instead of using the IEA scenario as a baseline, use the Paris Agreement scenario. This is not only in line with the 1,5-degree goal but
also reflects an internationally signed and acknowledged framework.
Explain/define 'representative samples of exposures' for SNCIs.
The Guidelines have added an obligation for
banks to document and justify their
Require that institutions explain how it manages to identify representative methodological choices including for SNCIs
sample of exposures in their portfolios, as this determines the quality of the the
identification
of
representative
generalization of the results.
exposures.
Require institutions to highlight how they use counterparty-level data to Counterparty-level data is an input to
perform portfolio analysis. Require the banks to explain when an aligned portfolio analysis. Alignment analysis can
portfolio includes counterparties with high misalignment and that could lead also be performed at counterparty level.
to high-risk exposures for the bank, for example in terms of strategic or
reputation risk of the bank.
Provide detailed information on specific scenarios and methodologies, See above regarding the choice of scenarios
specifically on regional characteristics (sectoral/jurisdictional). Ensure the and key criteria.
methodology is acknowledged globally (not European).
Lacking a credible approach/metrics to analyse portfolio misalignment with The Guidelines specify main features of
climate objectives as a source of transition risk, EBA should provide more methods but leave a degree of flexibility to
guidance on the possible approaches for comparability.
banks to develop their own tools.
Provide further guidance on how portfolio-based methodologies can be The requirement on nature has been
applied to ESG risks, including nature, from both a financial and impact- clarified, still with flexibility left to
related perspective.
institutions to develop their own tools.
The explicit mentioning of heatmaps raises questions, as floods seem to Heatmaps are a relevant tool and can be
generate the most material damage in the EU.
applied to a range of E (including floods), S
and G factors.

Section 4.2.3
amended

Section 4.2.3
amended

No change

Section 4.2.3
clarified.
No change

104

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para. 38a
Methods to
identify natural
capital
dependencies

Para. 38
Requirement
goes beyond
mandate; impact
materiality
Para. 38b
Remove SDG or
concerns related

Heatmaps for S&G will require more time in order to be able to identify
relevant topics, exposures and metrics.
1. Support.
2. Provide additional guidance, e.g. indicators such as deforested hectares or utilising tools like ENCORE (Exploring Natural Capital Opportunities, Risks, and Exposure) to assess the impact of environmental
degradation on financial portfolios.
3. Tools mentioned are Impact Analysis tool (UNEP FI), the Biodiversity
Risk Filer (WWF) and the Water Risk Filer (WWF).
4. Para. 38a should mention also "impacts" on nature and not only "dependencies" to better represent the environmental risks stemming
from the portfolio exposures.
Para. 38 is impact materiality. But either (i) the institution has made
commitments and full transparency must be provided on the method and
scope of these commitments, or (ii) it has not made a commitment and the
guidelines must not create a framework and an obligation to make a
commitment.
1. Support.
2. Remove reference to SDG goals; positive impact goes beyond risk
perspective. The EU and member states utilize the SDGs as a framework for setting political goals in legislation. Therefore, alignment
analyses implicitly cover the SDGs.
3. The CSRD sufficiently addresses how companies position themselves
in relation to the SDGs.
4. The requirement is deemed restrictive and not consistent across the
document.
5. Caution that in some business activities, conflicts between the SDG
goals arise.
6. Why would EBA refer to SDGs when we have principal adverse impacts within SFDR? Couldn't the Regulatory Technical Standards be
used for this?

The Guidelines do not require specific tools Section 4.2.3
but institutions can consider the tools amended
mentioned in the comments as well as
potential other tools and data bases.
Impacts on nature has been added with a
view to assessing potential related financial
risks.

Adverse impacts may result in financial No change
effects.

The requirement has been maintained as it No change
only applies to large institutions and can
inform the assessment of risks linked to a
range of ESG factors, taking into account data
requested or made available under other
regulations such as CSRD and SFDR.

105

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

GL on scenario
analysis

In relation to the future Guidelines on scenario analysis, it would be helpful The EBA will issue a consultation in Q1 2025 No change
for the EBA to provide additional detail on the anticipated timelines and and final Guidelines by end-2025.
scope.

Question 10: ESG risk management principles
(par. 40) ESG as
driver of
traditional risk
categories
(par. 42 intro)
time horizons of
10 years - too
short

The definition of ESG risks provided in CRR No change
applies throughout the Guidelines.

(par. 42 intro)
time horizon of
10 years - too
long

We welcome the recognition that ESG risks are not an independent risk type,
but transversal in the sense that they influence traditional risk types.
Depending on the paragraph ESG seems to be a separate risk instead of a
driver of traditional risks.
We encourage the EBA to consider a longer time horizon than 10 years
because: need to capture the longer-term physical effects of climate change;
the (NGFS) scenarios tend to be longer term; transition plans are aiming for
net zero emissions by 2050; many net-zero commitment and climate pledges
aiming for 2050.
The 10-year time horizon implies enormous challenges given the lack of
available data, as well as the uncertainties inherent to the transition.
Institutions should therefore be granted enough flexibility to set their own
time horizons and interim milestones under the Guidelines.

Challenges for long time horizons exist but
various including long time horizons need to
be integrated into comprehensive and
forward-looking
risk
management
approaches for ESG risks, as also required by
CRD, which also specified the minimum 10
years period.

(par. 42 intro)
support
(par. 42 intro)
too prescriptive

A time horizon of 10 years or longer is feasible and adequate for many
institutions. However, promotional banks and guarantee institutions
members pursue business models and funding mandates that are
characterised by shorter terms and observation periods. This also applies to
the period typically considered in the risk management process for material
risks. We therefore propose that the wording here be adapted to a long time
horizon so that a suitable definition can be made for the institutions on the
basis of the business model and the respective funding mandate.
The principles seem consistent to us and the "minimum" range of tools for
managing and monitoring ESG risks seems sufficient to us.
We have found the requirements outlined in para. 42 to be somewhat
restrictive. It should be at the discretion of the institutions which measures

See above on time horizons and below on Section 5.1
plans.
clarified

The section has clarified that banks should Section 5.1
take into account the principles applied to clarified
the level of granularity and quantification
tools outlined in paragraph 19.

The comment has been noted.

No change

The requirement for institutions to No change
determine which combination of tools they
106

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 42 intro)
language
(par. 42 intro)
Proportionality

(par. 42a)
Engagement
activities –
suggestion to
create dedicated
EBA GL on this
point, more
guidance needed

(par. 42a
Engagement
activities as risk
mitigation tool –
need to be
effective and
credible

they take to measure and mitigate risks. In the latter case, "bearing a risk"
may also be a possible option that is not even considered by the EBA here.
Regionally anchored institutions or institutions with a sector specialization
are inherently less diversified but have specialist knowledge. With regard to
the tools to be considered (para. 42), we request that the wording "at least"
be deleted and the measures mentioned be cited as examples, not intended
to be mandatory.
In par 42d, the term “ESG-relevant criteria” is not precise enough. It should
be replaced by the term “ESG risk-relevant criteria”.
The engagement policy should not be a binding tool in its scope
(counterparty and services concerned) and in the elements to be included
therein as it relates to the customer and trust relationship between the
customer and the bank. We therefore recommend that the guidelines
present this topic as a tool that the institution can consider in a proportionate
manner.
Need of EBA guidelines on institutions’ engagement with counterparties: for
the paragraph 42 a), we strongly recommend EBA to develop such guidelines,
as a follow up of these guidelines (ie in the course of 2025). Indeed, the points
(a) to (d) are not detailed enough and will very likely be difficult to implement
and to monitor. For example, it is not specified at all what the “soundness”
of counterparties’ transition plans should mean (ii) and how they should be
assessed by institutions. For this critical issue of transition plan assessment,
EBA should build on the ATP-COL global multi-stakeholder initiative, led by
the World Benchmarking Alliance. What engagement means exactly should
be specified by EBA.
We support the recognition of the role that engagement should play as a tool
to mitigate ESG risks. However, EBA should clarify the expected measures to
encourage counterparties to mitigate and disclose ESG risks. Institutions
indeed cannot consider having mitigated their ESG risks if engagement does
not result in mitigating actions at the level of the counterparty or in the
integration of the actual risk. Engagement activities should therefore be
linked to clear time-bound objectives, an escalation process and a

will apply, considering a range of tools
specified by the Guidelines, is not considered
overly prescriptive. Banks may decide to
apply some tools to a higher/lesser extent,
ensuring consistency with their risk appetite.

The term has been changed to ESG-risk
relevant criteria.
The banks should consider engaging
counterparties for sound risk management
and transition planning. See also clarification
on the scope below.

Section 5.1.
amended
Section 5.1
amended

The EBA is not mandated to issue other, new No change
Guidelines on engagement. However,
requirements for engagement policies as well
as for the assessment of counterparties’ ESG
risks have been included in these final
Guidelines on ESG risk management.

The final Guidelines have incorporated in this Section 5.1
section the requirements on engagement amended.
that were originally part of section 6, and
which include aspects relating to
counterparty-specific actions, including exit
as a last resort. Escalation procedures should

107

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 42a)
Engagement
activities –
influence,
feasibility/
flexibility,
proportionality,
potential clashes

(par. 42a(i, ii))
Which
counterparties
to engage with –
more precision
needed

divestment strategy for off-track counterparties or counterparties with no
sound and credible transition plans.
The lever with the counterparts highly depends on the type of services banks
provide and the depth of their customer relationship.

be specified in the engagement policies (see
below).
These elements would be considered by Section 5.1
banks in their engagement policies.
amended

We fully share the EBA view on the importance of engagement policy to
ensure consistency with banks’ climate commitments. However, we are
wondering whether these guidelines are an appropriate place to stipulate
engagement policies. The first objective of the engagement policy is to
collect relevant data which is consistent with the need of data quality.
Beyond that, the need for banks to strive towards improving the
counterparts’ ESG profile (and relative metrics) should be left as a tool that
banks may consider managing their ESG risks or the implementation of their
transition plans, instead of being required in these guidelines.

The Guidelines refer to engagement as a
means to gather relevant information in the
data processes section. In addition,
engagement as a tool in the risk management
and transition planning toolbox is considered
relevant also from a prudential perspective.

We would like to highlight that there does not appear to be any
proportionality around the proposed requirement for institutions to engage
counterparties, as specified in para 42(a).
Need for specification: We call on EBA to provide more granular definitions
on the terms most important and most critical counterparties, large
counterparties and large corporate counterparties.

The Guidelines have clarified that banks
should
determine
the
scope
of
counterparties with whom to engage.
The final Guidelines require banks to Section 5.1
determine the scope of counterparties with amended.
whom to engage, taking into account their
materiality
assessment
and
risk
We note that the Draft Guidelines include various qualifiers to describe the measurement methodologies to support
scope of counterparties that should be covered by engagement activities. A their prioritisation choices.
balance needs to be struck between encouraging institutions to meaningfully
engage with counterparties who are most relevant to the management and
mitigation of ESG risks, and avoiding creating an overburdening obligation to
demonstrate engagement with every possible counterparty. A key learning
in relation to striking this balance was that prioritisation of stakeholders is
vital. However, the group of relevant or priority counterparties can vary
widely across financial institutions, depending e.g. on the business model of
the firm, the sectors it provides financing to, or the geographic location of
108

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 42a(i))
Which
counterparties
to engage with –
materiality
criteria and
definition of
criticality

the counterparties. In addition, it may make sense for an institution to evolve
its stakeholder prioritisation over time. Importantly, the size of a
counterparty may not necessarily be a reliable proxy of whether engagement
with that counterparty should be prioritised, as size may not be a good
indicator of the extent of that counterparties’ relevance to the ESG-risk
exposure of the financial institution and/or the success of its transition plan.
In some cases, the financial exposure to a given counterparty may be more
relevant.
In the identification of priority counterparties where engagement should be See answer provided above.
carried, we also recommend EBA clarifying the factors of criticality. The size
of the exposures, but also the sector, the availability of transition plans, the
location and the deviation from initial transition targets are factors that
should be considered.

We would also emphasise that the scope of counterparty engagement
should be linked to institutions materiality assessment, rather than solely
size. That is the prerequisite to ensure efficient allocation of resources.
(par. 42a(i))
We also contend that engagement strategies should also include SMEs. NonWhich
large corporates will play an important role in the transition to a low-carbon
counterparties
economy, and institutions, through relationship managers, could contribute
to engage with – to this role. This would also prevent the generation of a portfolio-level
inclusion of
blindspot, where small ESG-related risks could, in the aggregate, become
SMEs needed
material to institutions.
(par. 42a(ii)) Role We support these ESG risk management principles, in particular paragraph
of banks in
42 on the need to consider a range of risk management and mitigation tools,
assessing clients including engagement with counterparties on their transition plans to
transition plans
improve their ESG risk profile.
(par. 42a(ii)) Role Additional guidance on how this assessment should be performed must be
of banks in
provided, including on sectoral pathways to which corporate transition
assessing clients pathways could be compared. We believe it should be the responsibility of
transition plans – public institutions to put in place effective measures to assess and monitor
the credibility and soundness of the counterparties’ transition plans.

Section 5.1
amended

SMEs may be included in the scope of Section 5.1
counterparties to engage with, depending on amended
institutions’ nature of activities. See
clarification on scope below.

No response needed.

No change

Risk assessment methods are specified under No change
4.2, however do not remove banks’
responsibility to assess the risk profile and
creditworthiness of their counterparties, by
taking into account ESG risks and risk
109

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

methodological
advice wanted

We would appreciate any proposals on the methodology for evaluating
clients transition plan, particularly regarding the feasibility of the plans.
(par. 42a(ii)) Role It should be clarified that banks cannot be made responsible for the
of banks in
assessment of the credibility of clients’ transition plans. Even with a limit to
assessing clients large counterparties, assessing the credibility of transition plans could in
transition plans – practice be a huge challenge for banks, especially without clear benchmarks
need to rely on
and further guidance as to the depth of the assessments and a clear link to
auditors, cannot materiality of risks. In any case such requirement would go beyond what
be responsible
should be the responsibilities of banks. The expectations should therefore be
clarified, including on the role of auditors in the assessment of clients
transition plans. While banks should be in the position to understand clients
plans, they should be able to rely on the auditors assessment of the
robustness, soundness and credibility of these plans. We should be able to
presume that plans published under CSRD are credible, reliable, robust, and
sound. Moreover, it should be noticed that if this process is to be made by
every bank, it can come with different outcomes.
(par. 42a(iii)) Need for specification: provide further guidance on how to assess processes,
greenwashing
and define escalation mechanisms where greenwashing risk is not mitigated.
risk
We have concerns about the evaluation of the processes of borrowers to
identify and mitigate greenwashing risks. The requirement seems to go far in
terms of banks’ interference in clients’ management. Banks should not be
made responsible for the review of the risk of greenwashing of their
counterparties (even the larger ones). From a proportionality point of view,
at least LSIs and SNCIs should be excluded from the analysis of greenwashing
risks.
(par. 42a(iv))
Paragraph 42 a) iv. should also mention explicitly here the use of an
Engagement
escalation process as part of the engagement process, including the potential
activities –
recourse by the bank to coalitions with other financial actors where relevant.
encourage to
This escalation process is key for the bank to make the most of its
mitigate risks
engagement with the counterparty in a context of risk management.

mitigating factors such as transition plans of
counterparties.
The Guidelines do not refer to credibility but No change
to transition plan of counterparties as
potential risk mitigation factors. Assurance
provided by auditors in the CSRD/ESRS
context do not relieve banks’ responsibility
for assessing the risk profile of their clients.

Requirements on the management of Section 5.1 and
greenwashing risk have been removed from section 5.6
this section and consolidated in section 5.6. amended

See above on integration of requirements Section 5.1
originally part of section 6, and below on amended
engagement policies including escalation
procedures to be specified under plans.

110

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 42b) more
guidance
(par. 42b)
Engagement
activities adjusting
financial terms
and/or pricing challenging

(par. 42c) Risk
management/mi
tigation - Risk
limits

(par. 42c and e)
Risk mitigation
tools – role of

In addition, we recommend a new point (vi) on divestment when needed as
a last resort strategy, if the escalation process is deemed to fail. As a matter
of fact, EBA mentions “last resort cessation of the relationship when
continuation is considered incompatible with the institution’s planning and
risk appetite”, in Pararaph 103.
The EBA could consider establishing more granular guidance on the
operationalization of these management principles, such as methodologies
for adjusting financial terms based on ESG risk assessments.
At present, institutions may face challenges in empirically detecting the
impact of ESG issues on the PD or calculating the ESG-sensitivity of the risk
premium. This information is crucial for adjusting financial terms.
While adjusted pricing policy may result from the credit rating of the
counterparts it should not been seen as an automatic tool to use to manage
ESG risks. Indeed, such a tool, if required by regulation, could result in level
playing field issue where other banks will offer better prices.
This could create important level playing field issues, resulting in EU banks
becoming less competitive than non-EU banks, which do not face such
requirements. It may also disincentivize institutions from providing transition
finance. Also, in the case of syndicated loans where several banks are
involved, it may be complex to unilaterally change financial terms and
conditions.
We also ask for clarification that a limit is not set or derived solely on the
basis of ESG aspects. Various risk drivers are responsible for this as part of
risk management. This one-sided presentation of the limit (purely on the
basis of ESG criteria) would not be consistent and should not be understood
as integration into the existing methods and procedures.
To avoid misunderstandings, we request the following rewording:
“considering ESG for the purpose of setting global, regional and / or sectoral
limits, ...”.
The EBA should acknowledge the role of sectoral policies and especially fossil
fuel sectoral policies and other restrictions in ESG risk mitigation: Today,
many financial institutions already consider this, notably by adopting sectoral

The granularity of the Guidelines has been No change
considered sufficient.
The EBA acknowledges that there are No change.
challenges but institutions should develop
their practices to assess the impact of ESG
risks on financial risk types.
The Guidelines require banks to consider
adjustments in their pricing policies, where
relevant and in line with their risk appetite.

The final Guidelines have been adjusted by Section 5.1
clarifying that ESG risks should be considered amended
when setting limits.

Sectoral policies have been added more Section 4 and
clearly in the range of tools. In addition, fossil section 5.1
fuel sector entities are mentioned in the amended
111

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

sectoral and
restriction
policies

(par. 42d) Risk
management/
mitigationdiversification

policies that restrict their support to some activities and objectives to
increase support to higher ESG-ranked activities or companies. In this regard,
sectoral policies that apply to the fossil fuel sector are the most widespread
and can especially contribute to proper risk management, but other ESG
sectoral restrictions have been used (for example on tobacco).
It is our belief that the information provided in para. 42 d), such as 'by
economic sector or geographical area,' is intended as an illustrative example
and should not be regarded as a mandatory criterion. The example could be
removed as the bank establishes its own standards for diversification,
considering various factors. Although ESG criteria are significant, they are of
secondary importance in this context.
We do not agree with the request for banks to diversify their lending and
investment portfolios based on ESG-relevant criteria. EBA should not request
banks to have a certain percentage of exposures towards green investments
as a risk mitigation tool but must allow banks to assign investments towards
sustainable activities based on their overall commitments and investors’
appetite. Banks should focus on the quality of their exposures, and not on
the volumes of green exposures.

materiality assessment procedures, which
should support the engagement policies and
other risk management processes.

Yes, ‘e.g. in terms of economic sector or No change
geographical area’ is an example of possible
application. As in the rest of the section, the
requirement is to consider this tool as part of
a risk management approach.
Diversification can support institutions in
managing ESG risks, without any
requirement set in the Guidelines on the
volumes of green exposures.

Question 11: section 5.2 – ESG risks in strategies and business models
General

General

Para 43

The provisions should be reinforced, via among others divestment from most
environmentally harmful sectors or development of clear strategies to
finance and push the transition.
To ease the integration of ESG risks in institutions’ business model and
strategic planning, EBA should provide a template or framework to
operationalize the guidelines more effectively.
Some flexibility should be given to institutions to run their business model
and strategy, to define their risk appetite and to include ESG risks in their
already existing framework (with no need for additional tools for strategic
analysis or specific metrics), as long as they can demonstrate they have put

Banks remain responsible for setting No change
particular strategies. See also list of risk
management tools.
See answers on section 6 below, also as Annex added
regards the addition of an annex to the
Guidelines.
The section is not considered overly No change
prescriptive.

112

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para 43

Para 43

Para 43(a)
Para 43(d)

Para 44

Paras 43, 44(a)
and 45

in place a governance and a sound risk management framework. The
provisions are considered too prescriptive.
Particular flexibility should be given to SNCIs (recommending only a
qualitative analysis of strategy and risk appetite as part of the materiality
assessment, with no need of transition planning) and to entities with a ‘social
economy function’ (recognizing their mission, being social economy goals
aligned with ESG factors per se).
In institutions’ business and risk strategies, also possible risk arbitrage at
various horizon levels should be considered, as well as the need to ensure
that short, medium and long-term objectives and targets interact and are
well articulated.
Further guidance is needed regarding how business environment might
affect ESG risks.
EBA should reinforce provisions on KPIs, e.g. by making it clear that they
should be accompanied by a risk/profitability analysis, rely on specific
business and market assumptions and/or calibrated based on Paris
Agreement and the 1.5°C target, and by recommending the disclosure of KPIs
and amendments thereof over time.
Other respondents disagree on mandatory KPIs.
Considering the different level of details for ‘E’ risks, the EBA should clarify if
the provisions are applicable to all ESG risks, eventually complementing the
wording thereof.
The EBA should clarify the scope of stress tests (EBA or other stress tests? SIs
or also SNCIs taking a proportionality principle into account?)
The EBA should clarify the terms ‘ESG factors’ and ‘ESG perspective’,
suggesting that they should be accompanied by the term ‘risk’, and the para
44(a) should be deleted.

See answers provided on proportionality No change
above.

This aspect is covered under section 6.

No change

Institutions should assess how ESG risks can No change
affect the business environment.
Targets are key to support strategies and No change
their implementation should be monitored.
More details are provided under section 6.

No change – the section refers to ESG, in Section 5.2
particular E. See also above on C, E, S, G.
clarified.
It has been clarified that institutions should
take into account their internal stress tests.
The Guidelines refer to the ESG risk Section 5.2
perspective.
clarified

Question 12: Section 5.3 – ESG risks in risk appetite
(par. 48)
“escalation”

Paragraph 48 refers to an escalation process set out in section 5.8 but it looks Escalation has been mentioned more Section 5.7
like it is set out instead in section 6.5 paragraph 103.
explicitly in paragraph 80 in section 5.7.
amended
113

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Connection and
need for
consistency
between risk
appetite and
strategic
business model
objectives
(general)
planetary
boundaries
(general) insights
from stress
testing
(general) ESG as
stand- alone vs.
driver of
traditional risk
categories
(par. 46) no
appetite
(exclusion)

(par. 46, 47)
proportionality,
flexibility, too
much granularity
required in the

Risk appetite is a framework for dialogue between strategy and risk
considerations. It would be useful to take advantage of this framework to
ensure overall consistency with any climate commitments made by the bank,
the transition plan and its sector-specific dimensions on objectives
(decarbonization, financing).
All this should feed into the risk appetite and credit limits that the institution
must set itself, if we assume that the prudential transition plan must
contribute to (or not detract from) the climate transition plan.
Given the unprecedented urgency of the state of climate change and nature
loss, we recommend EBA to express more prescriptive recommendations on
what level of ESG risk appetite might be considered excessive or dangerous.
In this, we suggest referring to the planetary boundaries.
Additionally, the EBA could provide guidance on integrating ESG risks into
stress testing frameworks, further informing risk appetite decisions with
forward-looking insights.
It is not clear why ESG should play a separate role as a risk driver when
determining risk appetite compared to traditional risks. Ultimately, it
materializes in the known risk types for which risk limits and risk capital are
set or allocated.
The separate consideration of ESG as a risk driver when defining the bank’s
risk appetite is questionable, as it affects the traditional risks.
Paragraph 46 outlines that the risk appetite should specify the type and
extent of ESG risks institutions are willing to assume. This should be further
nuanced indicating that this should include no appetite / exclusion areas, e.g
knowingly lending to companies that will use the money to violate human
rights.
To ensure proportionality, the granularity of the requirements should be
adjusted. Institutions should be granted more flexibility in defining their ESG
risk appetite, taking into account factors such as business model, size, and
portfolio structure. For example, it may be considered excessively granular
for large institutions with a diversified business model to provide a higher
level of detail than at the country level. As with other sections of this

The Guidelines have added that the Section 5.3
integration of ESG risks in the risk appetite clarified
should be consistent with the institution’s
strategic objectives and commitments and
with the plans and targets specified under
section 6.

The Guidelines specify risk management No change
arrangements from a microprudential
perspective.
Inputs from stress testing should inform No change
business strategies under 5.2 hence risk
appetite.
ESG risks need to be defined and addressed No change
in risk appetite in order to manage their
impacts as they materialise in traditional risk
types. This is in line with BCBS principles and
CRD6 which refers to “risk appetite in terms
of ESG risks”.
The Guidelines require banks to determine No change
KRIs such as limits, thresholds or exclusions.

The final Guidelines have clarified that Section 5.3
institutions should determine their KRIs amended
based on their business model and have
added a reference to risk limits set at a lower
level within institutions, so that ESG risks are
both captured at the highest level with
114

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

current
paragraph

(par. 47) further
guidance on ESG
KRIs
(par. 47)
minimum set of
KRIs is too large
(par. 47)
language
(par. 46, 47)
need to
distinguish
between toplevel RAF and
lower-level limits
framework

(par. 48)
cascading not
feasible, and

consultation paper, we kindly request that this be limited to key assets,
material products, and services.
We believe that the significance of identifying the type and degree of ESG
risks at the granularity of the proposed guidance is minimal.
It is difficult to have too many metrics in the RAS, only the most appropriate
ones should be selected. In addition to being technically difficult to construct,
such a level of granularity would make it difficult to understand and link with
capital allocation.
We suggest that further guidance should be provided with regard to the term
"ESG-related key risk indicators", i.e. in particular with regard to the
catalogue of criteria, the framework and scope of this requirement.
Institutions should be allowed to justify removing KRI from the minimum set
of KRIs to be used for defining the ESG risk appetite, e.g. in case of lacking
data availability or alternative and comparable steering measure already in
place.
In paragraph 47, the term “ESG considerations” gives rise to
misunderstandings and should be replaced by “ESG risk considerations”.
In the proposed guidelines we do not see a clear differentiation between the
Risk Appetite Framework (RAF) and the general limit/threshold framework
that an entity can have at a lower management level. It is important to make
this differentiation, to avoid hampering the correct functioning of the risk
appetite framework. The RAF is a formally defined process, with a strict
governance model. It is approved by the Board of Directors, and it is based
on internal metrics. The risks included in the risk appetite framework must
be quantitatively targeted, measurable, and monitored within a specific
timeframe (monthly, quarterly). Moreover, they must be carefully selected
as the most relevant within their risk category, as we are the top
management level. Any other limit/threshold system should be left for lower
management levels.
For large institutions, metrics and targets must be set at consolidated level
and it would not be feasible to run different sets of metrics at group level and

selected key indicators and at lower levels
with potential additional indicators and
limits, consistent with the overall risk
appetite.

ESG-related KRIs should translate the risk
appetite into concrete indicators, in line with
the risk appetite function and design.
The final Guidelines have clarified that banks
should determine which KRIs they include in
the risk appetite, by considering metrics
under 5.7.
The final Guidelines use the term ESG risks
considerations.
The final Guidelines have clarified that
institutions should determine their KRIs
based on their business model and have
added a reference to risk limits set at a lower
level within institutions, so that ESG risks are
both captured at the highest level with
selected key indicators and at lower levels
with potential additional indicators and
limits, consistent with the overall risk
appetite.

No change

Section 5.3
clarified

Section 5.3
clarified
Section 5.3
amended

The final Guidelines have been adjusted to Section 5.3
require that institutions should ensure that amended
all relevant group entities and business lines
115

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

could lead to
outsized focus
on ESG inside
RAF

at more granular levels. This could create adverse effects and would certainly
be too difficult to monitor.
Also it seems important to keep in mind that adding too many metrics,
targets and limits on ESG considerations may create dangerous unbalanced
effects on the full edifice of the Risk appetite framework compared to other
risks. As such, we recommend starting with basic ones and to incorporate
gradually as ESG factors become material new ones.
In any case, banks should give enough flexibility to choose relevant metrics
with targets and limits/ with a focus on the most material risks to its business
model.
The consideration of ESG risks in risk appetite should be aligned with the
entities' management that already considers the embedding of such risks
considering their geographical footprint, business diversification, among
other factors. Banks should not be required to change their management
processes due to the requirement to conduct a cascade down approach. Risk
appetite should be monitored in those risks deemed material according to
entities' own models and internal procedures (e. g., at client level, portfolio
level).
Rather than cascading, a combination of origination policies and close
monitoring could prove much more efficient and would avoid potential
adverse effects.

and units bearing risk properly understand
and implement the institution’s risk appetite.
Risk limits set at different levels within
institutions should be consistent with the
overall risk appetite in terms of ESG risk.

Question 13: Section 5.4 – ESG risks in internal culture, capabilities and controls
(section 5.4 in
general)
supportive; tone
from the top is
key

Strongly support the inclusion of the proposed guidance on culture, No response needed.
capabilities and controls within the scope of the EBA Draft GL. These all play
a critical role in ensuring that companies are able to respond effectively to
ESG risks, including by developing and implementing robust and credible
transition plans. Key strength: integrating ESG risks into existing governance
systems (including the 3 LODs) as opposed to proposing separate, ESGspecific structures. Aligned with bringing robust management of ESG risks
into standard business practice, and importance of "tone from the top" (Par.

No change

116

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Alignment with
CSRD/ESRS
(section 5.4. in
general) too
prescriptive /
redundant,
suggestion to
delete the whole
section 5.4

(par. 49) fit and
proper - goes
too far

(par. 49); banks
to engage with
city experts &
universities
(par. 49)
expected ESG

50) which in our experience with leading companies (mature TPs) is flagged
as a key success factor in securing organisational support for integrating
climate transition planning into business strategy.
Recommend to align section 5.4 on internal culture, capabilities and control
with the European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) and particularly
the ESRS G1-1 on Corporate culture and business conduct policy.
The EBA GL on Internal Governance provide sufficient framework for the
implementation of an appropriate risk culture and the concept of the 3 LODs.
The explanations in section 5.4. are redundant with the mentioned GL and
contrary to considering ESG as driver of existing risk categories.
Banks' internal governance and control guidelines already include specific
instructions that affect the whole entity and should suffice. Separate policies
and governance for ESG purposes should not be required. Banks should be
granted the flexibility choosing the way they organize suiting their own
circumstances and preferences, taking into consideration ESG factors when
appropriate and integrate ESG into their existing processes. Standalone
processes and controls to manage ESG risk factors should not be required.
Section 5.4 is too restrictive of the organizational freedom of institutions with
regard to ESG topics. We are in favour of deleting this section.
Agree on importance of training management on ESG given the novelty of
these risks but it should not be a determinant factor in considering a member
of the management bodies as unsuitable.
Suitability assessments for managers and key function holders should not be
used as a tool to choose decision-makers in institutions according to their
overall ESG political preferences.
There may be scope for institutions to further develop relationships with
universities, cities and city science offices to strengthen their internal culture,
capabilities and control capacities – for understanding and interpreting
scientifically verified ESG risks which are particular to environmental and
social investments in regions, cities and urban environments.
The recommendation for adequate training of the banks' management body
and staff on ESG risks should be clarified. Expertise on climate & ESG risks is

This section is consistent with ESRS and with No change
EBA Guidelines on internal governance but
focused on ESG risk management for banks.
The explicit incorporation of ESG risks into No change
the overall risk culture and three lines of
defence model is deemed an important part
of sound risk management of ESG risks. The
Guidelines specify what arrangements
should be in place for ESG risks, ensuring
consistency with internal governance
Guidelines. This also reflects the BCBS
principles for climate risk management.

These notions are in the CRD6 and will be No change
further integrated in the Fit and proper EBA
Guidelines.

Although this is a possibility, banks are No change
responsible for deciding how specifically they
will increase their capabilities.

The Guidelines have added that training Section 5.4
policies should be kept up to date and be amended
117

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

skills require
regularly
updated
guidance; GL
should specify
more detailed
requirements for
ESG trainings
(par. 49)
qualifications
(par. 49 and 50)
language on ESG

(par. 49 / 50)
ESG KPIs should
feed into
performance
evaluation and
remuneration

(par. 51) Role of
external parties
vs. 3 LODs, and
role of internal
teams with
counterparty

nascent and evolving, with a range of available approaches. EBA with other
relevant authorities should provide banks with regularly updated guidance seek to clarify the types of training, knowledge, experience and expected
skills on ESG and climate-related risks that are appropriate for different staff
categories, and that are necessary to ensure collective suitability of the
bank's management bodies.
The GL should specify more detailed requirements for ESG training programs,
including core topics to be covered and recommended training frequencies.
EBA should define clear minimum requirements for the evaluation of
counterparties’ ESG risk mitigation actions and particularly the qualifications
of responsible staff to ensure that the latter follow a high standard.
In pars. 49-50 the term "ESG factors and risks" is misunderstandable and
should be replaced by "ESG risk factors". In paragraph 53 (d), the terms "ESG
features" and "ESG aspects" should be replaced by "ESG risk features" and
"ESG risk aspects", respectively, for clarity. It should not be a goal to impose
bank supervisors' ESG policies and societal norms when it comes to the
availability and pricing of financial services for individuals or corporates.
KPIs should be integrated into performance evaluation and remuneration
frameworks.
Remuneration schemes must be consistent with the institution's prudential
plan and formulated strategies, ensuring alignment with broader business
objectives and risk management priorities.
Remuneration schemes are key to ensure integration of ESG factors and risks
in the bank's internal organization. EBA should recommend that banks adapt
remuneration schemes to incentivize the staff in implementing the bank's
prudential transition plan.
A specific technicity might be required (especially on climate/biodiversity
topics) so financial institutions might leverage on external parties providing
specific technical inputs and this could be explicated in the GL as this does
not fit per se in the 3 LODs.

informed by scientific and regulatory
developments.
Requirements for the management body will
be further specified by the update to the fit
and proper EBA Guidelines.

It is considered that the Guidelines reach a No change
sufficient level of granularity on those points.
Terminology has been adapted to refer to Section 5.4
ESG factors and ESG risks. However, with amended
regard to products it is considered more
appropriate to refer to ESG features or ESG
aspects.
The integration of ESG risks into Section 6
remuneration policies is covered by the EBA amended
Guidelines on remuneration policies which
will be further specified to reflect CRD6
amendments. Section 6 also includes a
reference to remuneration.

Banks are responsible to decide how they will No change
ensure sufficient capabilities to manage ESG
risks. Regarding external parties, the existing
framework and requirements for outsourcing
arrangements apply.

118

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

ESG risk
expertise

(par. 52) 1st LOD
and product
approval
(par. 52) 1 LOD ESG risk
considerations in
client
onboarding
(par. 52)
Suggestion of
additional
wording to
enrich
description of 1
LOD role

Most financial institutions now have dedicated sustainable investment
teams. In many institutions, these teams play active roles at multiple stages
of the risk lifecycle: they may participate in counterparty risk assessments,
assist in drafting and disseminating ESG elements in credit policies and
procedures, or provide training to staff across the 1st, 2nd or 3rd LOD. They are
a key organizational element to foster an "ESG-aware" culture. EBA GL should
require large institutions to maintain a dedicated counterparty ESG risks as
departments as owners of counterparty-related ESG processes.
The draft places the approval process of new products within the first line of
defense, which is in contradiction with the traditional role and
responsibilities of the 2nd line compliance function.
Regarding risk assessments which should be carried out by the 1st LOD
(although ESG risk assessments should be conducted at different stages of
the client relationship), ESG risk observance should not be as comprehensive
in e.g. credit review process as is at client's onboarding. Exception to this
should be clients from sectors under alignment objectives who need a more
robust and continuous monitoring.
Proposal to a add the underlined words: The first line of defense should be
responsible for undertaking ESG risks assessments based on applicable
sustainability requirements and commitments, taking into account
materiality and proportionality considerations, during the client onboarding,
credit application and credit review processes, during investing processes,
and in ongoing monitoring and engagement with clients as well as in new
product or business approval processes. Staff in the first line of defense should
have adequate knowledge, awareness and understanding of sustainability
requirements and commitments to be able identify potential ESG risks.
Rationale: The quality of 1st LOD work depends on their knowledge of
applicable sustainability requirements and this should be explicit. Not just for
lending but also investment. Staff, namely managers in the 1st LOD on all
levels have key role and responsibility in this respect.

Dedicated teams can support the
management of ESG risks within institutions,
provided that this is appropriately reflected
and feeds into regular risk management
policies and practices.

The approval process of new products has Section 5.4
been removed from the 1st LOD paragraph.
amended
The depth of assessment is not specified by No change
the paragraph and can be adjusted provided
that it ensures prudent assessment of ESG
risks.

“investment processes” and “knowledge” Section 5.4
have been added. The explicit mentioning of amended
sustainability
requirements
and
commitments is not considered necessary
and does not represent all the aspects that
should be taken into account.

119

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 53b) 2nd
LOD –
“sustainability
commitments”
(par. 53b) 2nd
LOD –
Compliance
function
responsibilities
need aligning
with various
existing EBA GLs
and ECB Guide
(par. 53b)
Description of 2
LOD compliance
function, explicit
mention of the
legal function
and nuancing
the split of
responsibility
inside
operational risks

Given the diverse nature of ESG-related goals (e.g., objectives, commitments, The Guidelines have added claims and/or Section 5.4
targets), we suggest including a more detailed definition of "sustainability commitments. This may take different forms amended
commitments".
e.g. see EBA report on greenwashing.
Given that within standard corporate governance the compliance function
does not usually bear the ultimate responsibility of the firm's adherence to
laws and regulations, we suggest aligning this with paragraph 209 of EBA GL
on internal governance (EBA/GL/2021/05), with paragraph 47 of EBA GL on
the role of the AML/CFT Compliance Officer (EBA/GL/2022/05) and with
Expectation 5.5 of ECB Guide on C&E risks (2020) and thereby adopt a
formulation similar to the ones mentioned, such as: "the compliance function
should advise the management body on measures to be taken to ensure
compliance with" applicable rules and regulations.
Proposal to add the underlined words: The compliance function should
oversee how the first line of defense ensures adherence to applicable ESG
risks rules and regulations and should, in relation to the sustainability
commitments made by the institution and the respective policies set, provide
advice on reputational and conduct risks associated with the implementation
or failure to implement such commitments. The legal function should provide
advice on legal risks, including litigation risk associated with the
implementation or failure to implement sustainability commitments.
Rationale: As per dedicated EBA GL, the compliance function is a level 2
function and their main role is to oversee/to monitor the relevant 1st LOD,
e.g. commercial units, as they are the owners of the risks. With respect to
the advisory role of compliance function, wording should be precise to
include only reputational and conduct risks, as part of compliance risks and
not the whole range of operational risks, since different functions cover
different types of operational risks. Legal risk, including litigation risk, is
traditionally covered by legal function and this should be reflected also in this
EBA GL.

The Guidelines have been further aligned Section 5.4
with the Guidelines on internal governance amended
and include language as suggested in the
comment.

The Guidelines have been further aligned Section 5.4
with the Guidelines on internal governance amended
and include wording as suggested in the
comment, however without referring to the
legal function which is not subject to
particular
requirements
under
EBA
Guidelines on internal governance nor BCBS
principles on climate risk management. It is
however expected that all relevant functions
contribute to the management of risks,
including ESG risks, in line with sound
governance arrangements.

120

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 53b) 2nd
LOD –
Compliance
function – not
solely
responsible for
ensuring
adherence to
ESG
commitments,
and not at all
responsible for
some of them

(par. 53b) 2nd
LOD –
Compliance
function – not
responsible for
some of the risk
types listed here,
notably
operational and
legal risk – role
of Legal function
needs to be
explicit here

Ensuring adherence or providing advice regarding ESG risk rules or
sustainability commitments does not have to be a sole responsibility of the
compliance function. Assignment of the responsibilities can vary among
institutions for different reasons.
The compliance function is usually not the sole function responsible for
advising on measures to be taken to ensure compliance with the entirety of
rules, regulations and regulatory requirements - with prudential regulations
in particular typically falling outside of its perimeter. We would like the EBA
to provide further detail on the "applicable ESG risks rules and regulations"
to clarify Compliance responsibilities.
The role of Compliance as regards "sustainability commitments made by the
institution" is not central. There are several sustainability/ESG related
commitments which do not come under Compliance's scope nor require
specific actions by Compliance, although Compliance has a coordination role
regarding reputation risk.
It should also be noted that as a matter of principle, each Function is
responsible for risks within its perimeter, including ESG risk factors.
Consequently, operational risk comes under RISK's scope, the same way legal
risk is under the responsibility of Legal as a second line of defence (LoD2). As
formulated, the draft GL do not reflect these organizational principles.
We suggest that EBA comment on the envisioned role of 1st LoD in this
context.
Moreover, the EBA should further specify the role of Compliance in providing
"advice on operational risks", as some of the risks listed ("legal, reputational
and conduct") might fall outside of the scope of Compliance responsibilities,
depending on individual institutional setups.
In relation to [the Compliance function providing advice on operational risks
("legal, reputational and conduct risks") associated with sustainability
commitments, we recommend aligning with the EBA GL on internal
governance and allow for all relevant functions to provide advice in their
respective field of expertise.

See answers provided above. The compliance Section 5.4
function does not have to be the sole amended
responsible for the aspects mentioned.

All relevant functions should provide advice Section 5.4
in their respective field of expertise. The amended.
Guidelines focus on the 3 LODs, specified
under BCBS principles and EBA Guidelines on
internal governance. The operational risk has
been removed from the paragraph on the
compliance function.

121

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Role of
compliance for
products
Role of other
non-financial
risks specialists
such as Legal

(par. 54) 3rd LOD

Paragraph 53c accurately summarizes the role of Compliance as regards, for No response needed.
instance, new products with ESG features.
Agree with the role assigned to either the compliance or the risk
management units as shapers of the business units decisions, during the
design and approval process of new products with ESG features or for
significant changes to existing products to embed ESG aspects; but we
recommend to also include the rest of the non-financial risk specialists in this
role, for example, the legal unit.
Challenging specific metrics and calculations to establish the pathways goes
beyond the Internal Audit Function’s usual remit. They are built by LoD1 and
reviewed by LoD2, and IAF should not be mandated to build specific
capabilities for this. Once the data is built by LoD1 and LoD2, IAF must inspect
to ensure that the data has been managed with integrity, and that the
transition plans include the different aspects demanded by the regulation,
but nothing further.

No change

See above – legal function should be involved No change
in its area of expertise but the Guidelines
focus on the risk management and
compliance function.

The Guidelines do not mention challenging No change
specific metrics and calculations but
reviewing quality and effectiveness of the
ESG risks governance framework.

Question 14: Section 5.5 - ESG risks in ICAAP and ILAAP
(par. 55) ESG as
standalone
drivers or not

Non-inclusion
justification

The ICAAP is a global process that goes hand in hand with other internal
processes. While we agree relevant ESG risk drivers should be incorporated
into the process, these risk drivers should be indistinguishable from the rest
of the risks, meaning that the ICAAP should take into account all relevant risk
drivers in the same manner.
We support the approach to avoid a separate ESG ICAAP but rather include
the ESG dimension within the existing ICAAP. This is consistent also with the
overall approach that sees ESG risks affecting the traditional risk categories.
It is unclear what would be expected in the case where an institution sees
that ESG risks do not affect the ICAAP (e.g. would a qualitative description as
to why that is not the case be required?).

ESG risks are defined in CRR; they materialise Section 5.5
through the traditional categories of financial clarified
risks. The Guidelines have clarified that
material ESG risks and their impacts on
financial risk types should be captured in the
ICAAP.

Institutions should provide sufficient No change
information to understand their analysis of
the capital implications of ESG risks.

122

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Economic and
regulatory
perspectives
(par. 55) too
early for E, S and
G

(par. 55)
Concerns on
ILAAP

(par. 55) Long
time horizon vs.

To the best of our knowledge, the EBA has not used the terms “economic”
and “regulatory” perspectives in its previous supervisory publications. A clear
definition of these two terms is therefore necessary.
The climate risk dimension is fully integrated in our bank’s ICAAP. However,
the EBA should take a sequential perspective and start incorporating
environmental-related risk factors and not rush into including social and
governance until we have enough data to ensure we do it in a sound manner.
The BCBS Climate Principles, which are more narrowly scoped in terms of risk
focus than the draft GL, recognize that "climate-related financial risks will
probably be incorporated into banks' internal capital and liquidity adequacy
assessments iteratively and progressively, as the methodologies and data
used to analyse these risks continue to mature over time and analytical gaps
are addressed." This consideration should also be applied by the EBA in terms
of recognizing that the ability of banks to capture climate-related risk drivers
in the ICAAP exceeds that of broader E/S/G risk drivers.
The banking industry is at an early stage in terms of understanding the
transmission channels to liquidity risks. The lack of information is a significant
obstacle to integrate ESG risks into the ILAAP, especially S and G.
These draft recommendations are difficult to understand given the
EBA/REP/2023/34 report on the role of E and S risks in the prudential
framework, as no changes are expected regarding LCR and NSFR.
Liquidity risk is a short-term risk, whereas climate and environmental risks
are more expected to materialize over a longer-term horizon. The
disconnection between these two timeframes means that the
materialization of climate risks in the definition and management of liquidity
buffers today for banks is not expected to be material. Nevertheless, to the
extent that climate and environmental risk drivers could have consequences
on liquidity, these consequences would have to be taken into account.
Certain methodological features related to ESG risks conflict with
ICAAP/ILAAP internal features and need to be further elaborated on before
being requested. The forward-looking nature of ESG risks requires the use of

These terms have been removed from the Section 5.5
final Guidelines.
amended
It is recognised that banks’ practices are No change
more advanced on climate-related risks.
However, as explained in the Guidelines,
tools and practices should be developed for
other types of E risks and approaches to S and
G should be gradually enhanced. CRD6 in
article 73 (ICAAP) refers to ESG risks. The
section notes that banks should take into
account the levels of availability and maturity
of quantification methodologies for different
risks.

Given the characteristics of ESG risks as Section 5.5
drivers of liquidity risk, the evolving market amended
practices and the regulatory framework, the
final Guidelines have separated the
requirements on ICAAP and on ILAAP to focus
the latter on E and on appropriate time
horizons within the scope of ILAAP coverage.

Institutions should consider various time Section 5.5
horizons for the assessment of ESG risks. In amended
addition, CRD article 73 requires banks to
123

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

ICAAP purposes
(usually 3 years)

(par. 56) Limits

long-term science-based scenarios that cannot serve as a basis for financial
projections, because science-based ESG scenarios do not easily translate into
financial risks scenarios. This requires a complete overhaul of current market
practices in terms of scenarios and forecasts. Requesting an immediate
inclusion of all ESG factors from longer term non-financial scenarios in
financial forecasts of the ICAAP comes at the risk of basing analysis on
forward-looking elements, whose impact on financial risks has not yet been
evidenced.
We assume that the risk observation horizon in the ICAAP remains
unchanged in both the normative and economic perspectives. Additionally,
we assume that no multi-year risk-bearing capacity calculation is required
beyond the normative perspective period. The most frequent time horizon
in the ICAAP is 3 years. A multi-year calculation going beyond this should not
be mandatory. The longer-term time horizon of 10 years would serve to
inform the normative and economic perspective with regard to possible ESG
risk factors. Disagree with backing medium and long-term risks, which are
not reliably quantifiable, with internal capital - this would be neither
appropriate nor sensible.
The time horizons considered for internal capital are fundamentally different
from the time horizons considered for ESG purposes. For ICAAP, institutions
make forecasts based on methodologies, historical data and plausible
scenarios that cannot easily translate into longer term horizons. These
forecasts influence business planning and practical decision-making, which
can hardly be the case of 25-year projections. Hence, time horizons that go
beyond 10 years should only be informative and not serve as a base to the
normative and internal allocation of capital. Capital should remain within the
current prudential practises, and not cover hypothetical medium to long
term ESG factors that will evolve in time, not necessarily translate into
financial risks and be mitigated in time.
It seems difficult to have specific limits/triggers regarding ESG impacts on an
indicator like the CET1 ratio or the ICAAP.

take into account the short, medium and long
terms for the coverage of ESG risks. The EBA
recognises however that quantifying longterm potential risks and building capital
planning for long time horizons raises
challenges. The Guidelines clarify that when
institutions take into account the short term,
medium term and long term for the coverage
of ESG risks, longer time horizons should be
used as a source of information to ensure
sufficient understanding of potential
implications of ESG risks for capital planning.
The time horizons considered for the
determination of adequate internal capital to
cover ESG risks should be consistent with
time horizons used as part of the institutions’
overall and regular ICAAP.

Institutions should describe limits set for No change
material ESG risks.

124

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 57) gradual
application?

(par. 57) ref. to
Section 4.2
(par. 57)
methodologies
and data
(par. 57) pool of
exposures
(par. 55 – 57)
too prescriptive
and too broad vs
current bank
approaches &
ECB expectations

(par. 57) ref. to
Section 4.2 on
scenario-based
methodologies

Integration of ESG risks (to be checked on correct understanding) in ICAAP
and ILAAP should only come after making progress on common
understanding and reliability of data as a first step for a dedicated treatment
of related exposures. A gradual and methodological approach is preferable
over setting (fixed) parameters and metrics.
We request clarification with regard to the reference in paragraph 57 to
section 4.2 that the reference is not intended to apply the longer-term
alignment method in the ICAAP.
Are institutions free in terms of methodologies to use for the evaluation of
internal capital relative to their ESG risks/factors?
Historical data is insufficient and there is no globally unified measurement
method, so it is difficult to take into account ESG risks.
Other approaches may exist such as to identify and measure internal capital
need for pool of exposures homogenous in terms of ESG risks rather than
individual exposures.
In line with the ECB Guide to ICAAP, the ICAAP is an internal process, and it
remains the responsibility of individual institutions to implement it in a
proportionate and credible manner. For now only risks arising from ESG
consideration for part of the banking book are taken into consideration by
banks in the ICAAP, if they are material. The assessment is based on climate
scenarios. Internal methodologies will be capturing counterparties transition
plans as they become available. We recommend aligning this section with
ECB expectations on this part and what was done on materiality assessment
by banks.
Supervisory scenario setting does not align with the internal character of
ICAAP, and we propose to refrain from it. The required mandatory inclusion
of E risk elements seems to have a permanent character, which does not
correspond to the internal character of ICAAP stress tests under the
normative perspective, which should address a financial institution’s key
vulnerabilities also taking into account the scenario horizon of (at least) 3
years.

It has been clarified that banks should use Section 5.5
insights gained from risk assessment clarified
methods to support the (binding) integration
of material ESG risks in ICAAP.
Insights gained through risk assessment No change
methods should be considered. See also
above on long-term time horizons.
Institutions should develop their methods No change
and consider insights from methods required
under 4.2, and document their analysis.
The term ‘portfolio’ applies in this context to No change
any group of exposures selected according to
some criteria.
EBA Guidelines specify new CRD6 No change
requirements and will be subject to comply
or explain processes for all EU competent
authorities.

The Guidelines do not set a particular No change
scenario, but a forward-looking view of
capital adequacy considering potential future
E risks is needed for sound risk management.

125

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

(par. 57) capital
needs - Space for
capital relief
needed

(par. 58)
supportive of
scenario analysis
for climate but
not for (other)
environmental
risks
(par. 58) more
granular
guidance
(par. 58) too
early for full
incorporation of
E scenarios

Agree with integration of ESG risks and transition plans in ICAAP and ILAAP.
However it seems that such integration will only require capital add-ons but
not capital relief. In the particular case of environmental risks, transition to a
net zero economy should be capital neutral. It is true that there will be
winners (banks that orderly transition to net zero) and losers (banks that
delay transition relative to peers). We believe credible transition plans
should drive Pillar 2 capital relief while lagging plans should attract capital
add-ons.
We have planned to integrate considerations related to climate risks into the
scenarios used for provisioning and capital planning. We have also
implemented climate-related stress scenarios for specific risk analysis (e.g.
stress on cost-of-risk). But we do not plan to have capital planning scenarios
driven primarily by environmental risks. We consider it excessive to impose
such specific stress scenarios for capital planning in the ICAAP.

Supervision including Pillar 2 capital No change
requirements is out of scope of these
Guidelines. Banks should assess ESG risks
implications for their solvency.

Request for more granular guidance on modelling and quantifying the
impacts of ESG risks within ICAAP and ILAAP frameworks, including examples
of adverse scenarios and stress testing methodologies also to
interpret/understand reverse stress testing regarding ESG.
Recognize the relevance of scenario analysis as a forward-looking tool to
assess the possible impacts of climate-related risk drivers in the future, given
the long-term nature of climate change. But it is premature for banks to fully
integrate E risk related scenarios alongside the wider economic scenarios
used for capital planning and projections, due to data and conceptual
limitations.

The Guidelines do not specify stress testing No change
requirements as this is, and will further be,
covered by dedicated EBA Guidelines.

Climate risks are part of E risks. The adverse No change
scenario should include E risks elements but
not necessarily be primarily driven by E risks.

Climate risks are part of E risks, see also No change
above on C, E, S and G.

Question 15: Section 5.6 – ESG risks in credit risk policies and procedures
Challenges for
social risks

There are insufficient definitions concerning the social sphere to allow for an See above on C, E, S, G. Quantitative credit No change
assessment of the adverse impact of such risks on an entity’s credit profile. risk metrics are required for E risks only in the
It is deemed challenging to determine materiality associated with social risks Guidelines.

126

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Credit risk –
quantitative
methods

Credit risk –
(permanent) use
of qualitative
measures

Insufficiency,
incompleteness
and
incomparability
of ESG data

ESG risk
mitigation
measures
Integration of
ESG risks in loan
origination and
monitoring
processes

and establish appropriate quantitative criteria and methods for evaluating
the impact on credit risk.
Quantitative credit risk metrics regarding environmental risks have not yet
been established and it is unclear what is specifically intended. Further
guidance should be provided regarding the requirement to develop and
implement quantitative credit risk metrics, such as a catalogue of criteria as
well as a description of the framework and scope of this requirement.

The Guidelines require to include No change
quantitative metrics in credit risk
policies/procedures
to
support
the
management of E risks. Institutions should
set their metrics and can consider the metrics
provided in 5.7.
In addition to quantitative credit risk metrics, the use of qualitative methods It has been clarified that institutions should Section 5.6.1
should be explicitly considered. The credit ratings established today consider implement a combination of qualitative and clarified
both, quantitative and qualitative aspects, including ESG risks. Some quantitative approaches.
institutions may initially have to use qualitative methods if quantitative
methods are not yet appropriate. Further, for certain areas and for certain
institutions, the use of qualitative methods should be permanently available.
Especially in context of the application of quantitative credit risk metrics, the See above on data.
Section 4.2
insufficiency, incompleteness, and incomparability of ESG data has to be
amended
considered.
ESG factors can drive credit policies in terms of portfolio segmentation, credit
allocation, target selection. The analysis of ESG risks could improve the ability
to perform an efficient and effective creditworthiness assessment with a
material impact on at least the probability of default and the loss given
default, if (and when) the underlined data is of appropriate quality. The most
important barrier that can slower this process is represented by metrics and
dataset. A lack of data is especially relevant for smaller institutions.
The section on credit risk policies and procedures could be more specific on See above on the exposure-based method Section 4
the question of ESG risk mitigation measures. In particular an analysis of and risk mitigating factors including amended
companies' transition plans in high-stake sectors would seem to be a priority. transition plan.
Credit granting policies should be aligned to the alignment trajectories that Banks should ensure consistency between Sections 5.1 and
some banks have publicly committed to follow.
their strategy, risk appetite and risk section 6
As part of credit policies, banks should clarify their procedures on management policies (see section 6).
amended
counterparty and projects that persistently refuse or fail to implement a
credible transition plan. Credit policy on large corporate counterparties
127

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Credit risk
metrics

Proposed
methodologies

should include a conditionality of credit to the counterparties’ credible plan.
Such a policy should also include an escalation process.
Banks should monitor physical and transition risks in segments of portfolios
that are deemed to be material according to banks materiality assessment
methodology.
As opposed to regulatory requirements for pricing strategies and pricing
decisions, a set of pricing best practices should be included. ESG-linked
features in lending are not intended to compensate institutions for taking on
ESG risks. Rather, the ESG adjusted interest rates and fees serve as an
‘incentive’ for the borrowers to meet specified ESG targets and, by this,
mitigate their transition risks.
The EBA should encourage financial institutions to voluntarily adopt
Mortgage Portfolio Standards (‘MPS’).
For the purpose of valuing collateral the IVSC International Valuation
Standards could be referred to as they are applied globally.

Engagement with counterparties is covered
under sections 5.1 and 6.4.
A reference to the materiality assessment Section 5.6.1
has been included.
amended.
As already laid out in the EBA GL on loan No change
origination, the pricing structure of a loan
product should reflect the inherent risk
profile of its counterparty, considering all
aspects including also ESG factors. Best
practices cannot be included.
Guidelines set requirements for banks.
No change
Specific details on the valuation of collateral
are out of scope.

Question 16: Section 5.7 – ESG risks in policies and procedures for other risk types
General
comments

Market risk

Article 4.1 point 52d of the CRR provides that environmental, social and
governance risk materialise indirectly through the traditional categories of
financial risks. Therefore, when it comes to para 63 and 66 of the draft ESG
Guidelines, the EBA should stick to the CRR 3 and not go beyond its mandate.
In relation to market risk, it is difficult to identify ex ante which part is due to
ESG as it is already embedded in the price of the products.
Further a waiver should be allowed for some of the charges suggested by the
report, such as adding a RRAO charge in FRTB-SA or asking for an RNIME in
FRTB-IMA for explicitly ESG-linked derivatives, should the bank demonstrate
to the satisfaction of competent authorities that the possible losses
associated to them are already covered in the prudential framework.
Stress test metrics are considered to be most suited indicators to account for
derivatives.

The Guidelines specify how ESG risks as No change
defined by the CRR should be taken into
account in policies for management of
different risk types.
Challenges are understood but banks should No change
develop
their
approaches
and
understanding.
Pillar 1 requirements are out of scope of
these Guidelines.
Forward-looking analyses are key and
mentioned in paragraph 67.

128

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Operational risk

Operational risk
losses –
identification
and labelling

Operational risk
–
Reputational risk

Reputational risk
related to
transition plan

Para 67

It is required to indicate whether the ESG factor flagging is required for each
operational loss event. Further, it needs to be clarified whether the mapping
should follow the 7 operational risk categories according to Basel
methodology or operational risk factors (people, processes, systems,
external events).
Paragraph 63 could provide illustrative examples of potential future impacts
from ESG-risks that could have an impact on operational risk as well as other
non-financial risks such as litigation and reputational risks.
While the internal taxonomies already have a natural disaster label it is
extremely difficult to differentiate between natural disasters that are directly
caused by environmental factors and those which are not (and driven by
cyclical factors). Further guidance is needed on how to identify and label
operational losses related to the environmental risks given the indirect
nature of ESG drivers.
Specifically in relation to the references to reputational risk in paragraphs 53
and 63 of the draft Guidelines, the current drafting seems to include
reputational risk as a component of operational risk, however that is
misaligned with the EU CRR3 definition of operational risk (which excludes
reputational risk). We would suggest deleting these references to
reputational risk in the final Guidelines for avoidance of confusion.
An explicit reference should be made, that a core aspect of reputational /
litigation risk is the discrepancy between banks transition plan and actions.
To address the reputational risk associated with banks failing to comply with
their sustainability commitments or transitions plans, it is recommended that
the EBA specifies that these plans are dependent on the EU’s and Member
States’ commitments to achieve climate neutrality, as outlined in the EU
Climate Law. Further, reputational risks are not considered significant for LSIs
in particular. Banks should not be held solely responsible in the event that
the EU or member states fail to meet or change their targets.
Para 67 should move away from provisions for yearly risk provisioning and
focus more on a dedicated RWA approach. Additionally, given that historical
litigation experiences are not fully public due to the confidentiality of some

The E flag is required when it is a driver of the Section 5.6.4
loss event. Reference to Article 324 of CRR amended
has been included regarding the different
regulatory operational risk event types.
ESG risks can impact operational risks
through various channels such as physical risk
drivers or litigation risk.
The identification and labelling should be
done consistently with the risk taxonomy and
methodology to classify loss events specified
by the dedicated RTS on this issue. Reference
to RTS pursuant to Article 317(9) of CRR
added.
To clarify this issue the reputational risk is
covered under a separate paragraph in the
final Guidelines.

Section 5.6.4
amended

Section 5.6
amended.

Discrepancy between plans and actions can No change
lead to reputational and greenwashing risks
as covered in the Guidelines.
The EBA notes that external dependencies
and assumptions should be explained by
institutions when disclosing plans and
targets.

Changes to RWAs are out of scope of these Section 5.6.4
Guidelines. The relevance of forward-looking amended

129

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

agreements, it is crucial to specify that any model incorporating historical
data might inherently underestimate this specific ESG risk. Therefore, a
dedicated RWA for each transaction above a very substantial amount
(limited to a few transactions) could be more than sufficient to manage this
liability risk effectively.
Regarding conduct, reputation, and litigation risk in para 67, we encourage
more focus on human rights, discrimination and other social controversies
which are known and tracked for corporate counterparties.
Greenwashing

Concentration
risk

Para 67 refers to the ESAs high-level understanding of greenwashing
(EBA/REP/2023/16). This is not a legal definition and should hence not be
referenced in the EBA GL. The broad understanding of greenwashing reduces
the legal certainty and therefore risks hampering financial institutions
transition finance efforts.
Clarification is needed if it is necessary to have a separate specific process to
identify, prevent and manage litigation or reputation risks resulting from
greenwashing or perceived greenwashing practices, or can it be catered for
by regular internal processes and standard risk assessments.
Paragraph 67 should be amended to consider situations where reputational
risk can also arise through NOT lending to or NOT investing in businesses,
because ESG-related controversies can and will go both ways, as experience
shows.
Clarification on whether banks should expect the final guidelines to be
amended in accordance with the final report on Greenwashing, including
concrete examples of greenwashing across investment value chain the
financial institutions should build on.
The requirements included in the draft Guidelines on concentration risks
could have adverse impacts on the financing of the transition as they would
not consider counterparties transition strategies and pathways.

analyses is however mentioned in paragraph
67.

Violations of human and social rights have
been added to illustrate potential ESGrelated controversies.
Reference has been kept as it provides a Section 5.6.4
reference point to understand greenwashing amended.
in the financial sector. Clear, fair and nonmisleading transition finance efforts should
not be penalised.
ESG risks including risks stemming from
greenwashing should be captured by regular
risk management processes.
Institutions should consider various risk
channels but this specific addition is not
considered necessary.
Reference to the final report has been
included. Institutions can consult the report
including for examples.
A reference to risk mitigating factors, which Section 5.6.5
can include counterparties’ transition slightly
strategies, has been included.
amended
Banks remain responsible to set their risk
appetite for ESG-related concentration risks.
130

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

The approach to concentration risk should remain flexible to allow banks to
use their own methodologies and define and measure ESG concentration risk
according to their own methodologies, risk appetite and business models.
The Guidelines require to manage ESGrelated concentration risk understood as
It is very difficult to carefully define concentration risk in the context of ESG risks posed by concentrations of exposures or
risk factors; there is not currently a well-established definition in the EU or collaterals
in
single
counterparties,
globally. Thresholds for what constitutes a high degree of concentration interdependent counterparties or in some
would likely be needed, including analysis of an appropriate way to define industries, economic sectors, or geographic
and calibrate such thresholds. Given that the risk assessment process is regions which may present a higher degree of
multidimensional, it is also necessary to avoid unintended consequences vulnerability to ESG risks; however, for the
associated with reliance on certain characteristics (e.g. some of the proposed purpose of the guidelines, thresholds for
metrics in the draft GL, such as GHG emissions) which could indicate that what constitutes high concentration risk
certain sectors or geographies are more or less risky in a way that is too should be determined by institutions in
crude.
accordance with their risk appetite.
Supervisors should not demand institutions attributing concentration risk
where a sector may or might be prone to ESG risk factors. This is too
subjective and could be influenced by political opinion, thereby masking the
real risk drivers that would require the institutions’ attention. Sentence 2 of
this paragraph the words ‘may be’ should be replaced by ‘demonstrably are’
(data-driven approach). Sentence 3 should be deleted, because it is not
helpful for describing the process of how existing concentration risk (as
opposed to assumedly problematic sectors) can be determined.

Assessing concentration risk on a sectoral
basis does not force institutions to adopt any
particular risk mitigating action. Institutions
should decide how to best manage ESGrelated concentration risks considering
section 5.1, which refers to engagement with
counterparties as one possible tool.

An approach of looking purely at industry concentration goes against banks’
efforts to engage with clients to assess the consistency of the clients'
transition plans with the institutions transition planning. In addition, this
contradicts paragraph of the section 6.5 of the Guidelines. Besides,
concentration risk is already part of banks' risk management frameworks,
including sector and geographical concentration, and it is also addressed in
the Pillar 2 framework.

131

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Question 17: Section 5.8 – monitoring of ESG risks
General

General

ESG factors are already incorporated in other existing and publicly available
reports, so there should not be any additional requirement to produce a
standalone report.
Indicators should not be considered mandatory in the final guidelines, but
sufficient flexibility should be given to banks in the identification of the most
appropriate metrics.

General

The focus is only on climate and considerations on other "E" risks and/or "S"
and "G" should be included.

General

The EBA should clarify that ESG risk monitoring also fully covers off balance
sheet activities and that facilitated emissions should be monitored.

General

The EBA should consider encouraging the development of industry-wide
benchmarks or thresholds for ESG risk indicators, facilitating peer
comparisons and transparency.

General

The EBA should clarify the expected frequency of monitoring activity.
Given that some risks, could materialise over varying or yet unknown time
horizons and especially climate-related impacts could worsen over time,
institutions should be encouraged to take a long-term consideration of ESGrelated financial risks and a proactive dynamic risk management approach.
The monitoring of metrics should be limited at the group level and such
indicators and thresholds should be set at a sector or portfolio level rather
than at individual client or entity level.

Level of
application

Paragraph 78 provides that banks may
integrate ESG risks into regular risk reports or
develop new dashboards.
The EBA is mandated to specify standards,
criteria and methods for the monitoring of
ESG risks. However, the full list of indicators
is only mandatory for large banks while
others should monitor a range, that they will
select.
It is recognised that progress on metrics is
most advanced on climate. However, the
section clarifies that large institutions should
monitor metrics related to nature and
biodiversity-related risks.
It has been clarified that banks should have
an institution wide view of ESG risks,
adequately covering the nature, size and
complexity of their activities.
The EBA considers that thresholds should be
set by banks. Benchmarks can usefully be
developed by the industry. The EBA is also
developing a risk monitoring framework.
Guidelines provide that institutions should
monitor ESG risks on a continuous basis and
implement
frequent
monitoring
of
counterparties and portfolios materially
exposed to ESG risks.
The Guidelines apply in line with the level of
application specified under article 109 of
CRD.

No change

Section 5.7
amended

Section 5.7
amended

Section 5.7
clarified

No change

No change

No change

132

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Proportionality

Para 72 (a)

Para 72 (b)

Para 72 (c)
Para 72 (d)

Para 72 (e)

The reference to the reporting requirement for SNCIs is unclear and the
limited availability of ESG related data (in particular from SMEs) needs to be
taken into better account.
The granular and frequent monitoring of counterparties cannot be
implemented for institutions that have a short-term lending business model
or for leasing companies.
The lack of data for historical losses should be considered.
Historical losses should be monitored with specific indicators per type of ESG
risk and more focus should be put on the monitoring of the exposures to
physical climate risk.
The KPI does not make sense at the NACE 1 aggregation level. The amount
and share of sector-related income seems unsuitable to capture relevant ESG
risks as it is unrelated to the risks of counterparties.
Institutions should monitor also investments in fossil fuels and other high
impact activities, besides the amount and share of income.
Risks need to be monitored at sectoral-based perimeter, to help make
connections with sectoral policies used to manage ESG risks.
Scope 3 emissions are deemed currently challenging to be recorded due to
limited data availability.
Scope 3 financed emissions is a crucial metric to assess the exposure of
financial institutions to transition risks and suggest to make it mandatory for
every sector and every portfolio.

The Guidelines have clarified that SNCIs and Section 5.7
other non-large banks may monitor only a clarified
subset of indicators.

This metric covers ESG risks hence also Wording
physical risks. Data for historical losses may clarified
be built progressively.
This metric can inform institutions on Section 5.7
potential business model dependencies.
amended.
Reference to amount and share of exposures
and income to fossil fuel sector entities has
been included.
See portfolio alignment section.
Section 5.7
amended
Data challenges are recognised but ongoing Section 5.7
efforts e.g. CSRD should progressively amended
alleviate them.
It is considered more appropriate to focus on
sectors and portfolios identified on the basis
of the materiality assessment.

A clear guidance and a consistent approach on Scope 3 emissions
methodologies are needed together with a request for qualitative The Guidelines have clarified that qualitative
information to complement the metric and interpret its evolution.
information should supplement the metric to
interpret its evolution.
The EBA should better specify how to define the percentage of Such aspects should be specified under banks Section 6
counterparties with whom the institution has engaged and institutions engagement policies, see section 6.
amended
should also report the objectives, the frequency and the governance behind
the engagement.

133

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Para 72 (f)

Para 72 (h)
Para 72

It may be more suitable to refer to a volume measure, such as credit A metric in form of a ratio informs about the
exposure and the proposed ratio is not risk-based metric.
level of progress achieved by the bank to
engage clients as part of risk management.
The GAR should not be included among the metrics to be monitored The objective of this metric is to compare
considering that i) it is not a risk management tool, ii) it does not reflect the Taxonomy-aligned exposures for climate
sustainability profile of institutions, iii) there are issues with its calculation change mitigation to carbon-intense
methodology.
exposures. However, due to methodological
challenges, metrics relating to adverse
impacts on other objectives of the Taxonomy
have been removed.
The metric should be complemented with indicators showing the portion of Institutions may compute and monitor
exposures Taxonomy aligned based on the classification framework adopted additional metrics, such as based on different
(e.g. GFANZ, CBI or ACT Finance).
classification frameworks adopted.
A reference to “water-stressed areas” risk among the physical risk drivers It has been added as an example of physical
mentioned should be added.
risk drivers.
Additional metrics are suggested:
The EBA has considered the suggestions and
• that reflect stakeholders' expectations regarding financial institu- adjusted the list of metrics. In particular, the
tions' disclosures and their connection to real-economy transition following metrics have been added:
- the energy supply banking ratio,
plans;
- progress in the implementation of
• related to portfolio-level dependencies on water or natural capital;
key financing strategies, which may
• counterparties’ progress in doing their transition;
include financial flows towards finan• low carbon CapEx;
cial assets or counterparties that
• energy supply-banking ratio (ESBR);
share a common set of characteris• sustainable power supply to fossil fuel financing ratio;
tics such as their alignment status
• climate Value-at-Risk;
relative to the applicable regulatory
• metrics related to physical, nature and biodiversity;
sustainability objectives and/or insti• at portfolio level
tution’s risk appetite
o portfolio alignment (by sector) with verified (externally) 1.5
exposures to fossil fuel sector entidegree goals;
ties and portfolio-level dependencies
o portfolio alignment of verified (externally) credible transion ecosystem services.
tion plans;

Section 5.7
amended

Section 5.7
amended
Section 5.7
amended

134

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

o

o
o

proportion of “green” (with breakdown specifically to sustainable power solutions) and “transition” exposure (with a
comprehensive science-based definition);
proportion of fossil fuel (with breakdown of coal, oil, gas) exposure with and without credible transition plans;
proportion of high emitting hard-to-abate sector exposure
with and without credible transition plans (with a comprehensive definition).

Question 18: Key principles for plans in accordance with Article 76(2) of the CRD
CRD vs CSRD
plans

SNCIs

Level of
prescriptiveness

Several characteristics of comparability and interoperability between CRD
and CSRD-related requirements on plans were raised:
- ESRS alignment: respondents expressed a range of views e.g. closer
/ looser alignment (internal procedure only) / no guidance necessary
- CSRD is not a plan but the reporting of a plan...
- ...leading to expected unicity of plan – one transition plan with a risk
side.
- Avoid CSRD / CRD confusion (naming, scope, ...)
In addition, disclosure scope was mentioned:
- Only banks in CSRD and CSDDD scope should be required to disclose
their CRD plans
SNCIs are only required to comply with the corresponding reporting
obligations starting from the 2026 fiscal year if reporting is required for the
first time. Therefore, it is recommended that any regulations for SNCIs should
not be provided before this deadline
Respondents asked for more or less prescriptiveness of the principles with
additional suggestions.
Less prescriptiveness:
o More flexibility in the implementation of the plans, recognising the
different materiality of the risk for banks

The Guidelines in the background and section Background and
6 clarify that banks should ensure that their section 6
plans address forward-looking ESG risk amended
management aspects while being consistent
with other applicable requirements including
those stemming from CSRD and CSDDD. CRD
plans are not subject to specific disclosure
but may partly be covered by other
transparency requirements.

The Guidelines provide a 1-year phase-in for
SNCIs to give additional time to implement
necessary changes, as well as several
proportionality measures.
See responses on level of prescriptiveness
and on alignment with EU objectives in
general comments, and responses on
materiality assessment, portfolio alignment
and risk management tools.

Section 6
amended

Section
amended.

135

6

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

o

Non-EU entities

GLs should focus on risk management tools and not on decarbonisation, alignment or sectorial targets
o The transition plans should not have in scope the business strategy
o Reference to EU law should not be interpreted as a requirement to
reduce emissions by 55% by 2030
More prescriptiveness:
- On scope:
o fossil fuels and other harmful activities
o decarbonization strategy, targets and their quality/alignment.
o elements related to financial planning
o engagement activities and their consequences for companies
o link between plans and remuneration
o due diligence requirement for banks.
o the importance of supply chain analysis for banks
o clarify sufficient capacity and resources (para 88.)
o financial materiality should be better clarified.
- On method:
o more emphasis should be given to risk acceptance and capitalisation of risks.
o frequency of update of the plans
o full ESG spectrum (e.g. E, S & G), their interdependencies
across relevant time horizons
o reference to the EU climate law should be clarified (e.g. 1990
baseline)
Respondents asked for clarifications or raised concerns regarding the
inclusion of non-EU entities in the scope of the requirements given that nonEU entities have lower data availability and face less ambitious climate
regulation.

With regard to other comments:
- exposures to fossil fuel sector entities should be considered as part of
materiality assessments, which form
the basis for transition planning;
- engagement including outcomes is
more clearly referred to in the key
contents of plans in section 6.4;
- remuneration policies are referred to
in the key contents of plans, reflecting new CRD6 provisions;
- the frequency of updates of plans is
clarified in section 6.5 and aligned
with updates of strategies required
by CRD;
- the scope of risks captured by each
part of the plan should be specified
as per paragraph 108.

See response on level of application. The No change
Guidelines state that parent institutions
should take into account ESG risks that
subsidiaries established outside of the Union
are materially exposed to when elaborating
136

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Time horizons

The feedback revolves around Define / Reduce / Extend the time horizons.

and implementing the consolidated plan, by
having regard to applicable local legislation
and ESG regulatory objectives.
See responses above on time horizons.
No change

Question 19: Section 6.2 – Governance of plans required by the CRD
Allocation of
responsibilities

Respondents raised comments regarding the following:
o Specify more which management body should be driving what (strategy, operational plan, ...).
o Consistency oversight with the overall bank strategy.
o Recommend specific ESG committees within the management body.

Risk appetite

Specify alignment between transition targets and risk appetite.

First line

o

o

Second line

Concerns expressed on over-expectation on counterparties / clients’
transition plan review. The credibility assessment should be performed externally.
S & G knowledge gap.

The (perceived equal role) role of compliance vs. risk management in the GLs
is being challenged:
o Respondents suggested the removal of the reference to the compliance function from par. 86 b) as the risk limits referred to in this paragraph are typically monitored by the risk management function.
o In alignment with paragraphs 179-187 of EBA Guidelines on internal
governance (EBA/GL/2021/05), which assign to the risk management

Requirements about the supervisory and
management function of the management
body as well as rules for the setting of
committees are specified by the EBA
Guidelines on internal governance.
Consistency of plans with overall strategy is
required in section 6.1.
Section 6.1 and section 5.3 require alignment
and consistency between plans and risk
appetite.
The 1st line of defence plays an important role
to assess the risk profile of counterparties
including given their transition strategies.
Expertise and capabilities should be
developed, noting the emphasis put in the
GLs on E.
The reference to the compliance function has
been removed from this paragraph to focus
on the role of the risk management function.
The compliance function’s responsibilities
are specified under section 5.4.

No change

Section 5.3
amended.
Section 6.2.
clarified

Section 6.2
amended

137

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Engagement
with
counterparties
without
transition plan

function the responsibility of the risk management framework including assessing the consistency of risk appetites and limits with the
risk strategy
Precise the expected engagement with counterparties with no transition The Guidelines require banks to determine, Section 5.1 and
plan because of their size, location, local regulation etc.
justify and document their engagement section 6.2
policies, including their scope. Transition clarified.
plans of counterparties should be leveraged,
where available.

Question 20: Metrics and targets
Targets and
Metrics –
Purposes
(Strategic versus
Prudential
approach)

Purposes
(Physical risk)

Targets and
metrics –
Consistency with
CSRD

The targets and metrics presented are strategic and unable to be used as risk
management tools. The content of the plans will be guided by public policy
objectives aimed at carbon neutrality. Therefore, it does not appear clear
how the targets and metrics will aid banks in the assessment of prudential
risk.
To solve this problem, two options could be considered:
- Paragraph 90 could be amended, by deleting “risk management and”
or replacing “with a view to mitigating risks” with “with a view to
achieve strategic goals”.
- In order for plans to both serve risk management and strategic steering purposes, metrics and targets could be defined as per the ESRS
with potential additional datapoints to fulfil specific requirements of
the prudential risk approach.
A reference to physical risks could be added in paragraph 90 (“risks stemming
from the physical impacts of changing climate”).

The metrics and targets in 5.7, 6.3 or 6.4 are Section 6.3.4
meant to focus on risk management aspects amended
such as integration in the risk management
framework, assessment and monitoring of
exposures / emissions / portfolios alignment,
engagement with clients etc. The choice of
specific targets is the responsibility of banks.
ESRS are disclosure purpose based and CRD is
focused on prudential / risk aspects.
See also response above on 5.7 and Annex
tool for indicative ESRS references.

Physical risks are integral part of No change
requirements as set in background (para. 20
– 30), in 4.1 - materiality assessment (para.
16), and metrics within 5.7 monitoring.
The guidelines should require data based on ESRS requirements. As of now, See responses above on data, time horizons Section 6.3
the metrics and targets lack consistency with CSRD. More specifically, the and metrics. The 3-years horizon reference amended
EBA should align the target-setting horizon of prudential plans with CSRD has been removed.
(2030 and 2050 instead of a short-term 3-year horizon). Consistency with
138

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Targets and
metrics –
Consistency with
NZBA
Consistency with
P3

Targets and
metrics –
Proportionality
Targets –
Extension of the
scope of
activities
covered
Targets different scales
Metrics –
Optional nature

future sector-specific ESRS for the financial sector should also be taken into
account.
The guidelines are not consistent enough with voluntary commitments such
as NZBA, especially because paragraph 94 raises concerns on the
methodology of alignment used (absolute vs relative emissions).
Moreover, it should be sufficient for CRD plans to refer to strategic climate
targets taken as voluntary commitments.
The guidelines should be more consistent with Pillar 3 reports.

This section of the guidelines could expressly recall the proportionality
principle as compliance with this section would be disproportionate for small
and medium-sized institutions.
The targets should cover all activities and jurisdictions and paragraph 89
should be re-written as “all activities and business lines are covered by
targets and metrics”. Institutions should set specific sector-based targets for
the most environmentally harmful sectors. These targets should be based on
the evolution of the sector in a 1.5° no/low overshoot scenario (with limited
volume of negative emissions).
Cascading down the targets at economic activities level (i.e. individual
technologies) seems too detailed and associated with uncertainties
regarding data quality and availability.
The metrics should be viewed as suggestions, rather than compulsory. The
guidelines are too prescriptive and would benefit from more flexibility given
to institutions (to tailor targets and metrics to the specific needs of each
institution). The guidelines should not require institutions to set targets for
metrics that are based on specific scenarios (e.g. the IEA NZ2050). If

The annex provides ESRS cross-references vs.
each part of the 6.4 output plan.
GLs set regulatory requirements for all
institutions. Alignment metrics are requested
and may be computed based on emissions
intensity. Consistency with voluntary
commitments is now mentioned.
Some metrics and parts of plans are
interconnected with parts of Pillar 3 and
where relevant consistency has been
ensured and references included in the
Annex. However, plans have their own,
internal risk management purpose and go
beyond Pillar 3.
Proportionality is recalled within several
parts of the GLs and specifically in application
of the metrics in 6.3.4 and 6.4.
Metrics and targets – including sector
alignment metrics – are meant to monitor
and address material ESG risks identified on
the basis of comprehensive materiality
assessments.

Section 6.1
amended

No change

Section 6.3 and
section 6.4
amended
No change

In some cases, metrics and targets can apply Section 6.4
to specific economic activities.
clarified
The Guidelines require banks to consider the Section 6.3.4
metrics listed in 5.7 for the purpose of target amended
setting. Banks should determine, taking into
account their business strategies and risk
appetite, which other risk-based and
forward-looking metrics and targets they will
139

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Metrics –
Mandatory
nature
Metrics –
Nature-related
risks

Metrics Transparency

Metrics –
Forward-looking
nature

Metrics –
Comments and
proposed
changes –

minimum requirements are kept, they should be concentrated to climate- include in their plans. Banks are responsible
related factors.
for setting specific targets levels. See also
above on IEA scenario.
The question of the limits to be set was also raised, with several respondents
calling for targets and limits to be imposed only on the most relevant metrics.
The mandatory nature of metrics is welcomed. The EBA could even take See response in row above.
further actions for a more prescriptive approach on the format and content
of transition plans.
The guidelines should include metrics related to nature-related risks The Guidelines require banks to take steps to
(including by adopting a double materiality approach informed by the progressively include metrics that support
recommendations of the TNFD).
risk assessment and strategic steering related
to
institutions’
exposure
to,
and
management of, environmental risks other
than climate-related, e.g. risks stemming
from the degradation of ecosystems and
biodiversity loss.
Banks must be transparent with the methodologies used to calculate metrics. CRD based plans are not required to be
disclosed. However, documentation of
metrics and plans is required in section 5.7
and section 6.4.
Point-in-time metrics might not be relevant and do not distinguish between The GLs mention that institutions should
investments in a high-emitting sector which are designed to decarbonise, compute, use and monitor forward-looking
versus those which finance the status quo. The guidelines need to lay out ESG risks metrics and indicators.
forward-looking metrics related to emissions such as Expected Emissions See also amendments to section 5.7 in
Reductions (EER).
particular on financed emissions (cf row
The combination of both point-in-time and forward looking metrics is needed below).
in order to get a “complete picture” of expected transition and physical risks
exposures.
Paragraph 94a) was subject to many proposals, among which:
The metric related to financed emission has
- Consider consistency with the methodology developed under NZBA been amended.
(targets are expressed as intensities and not as absolute emissions Para. 94a) is now 81c) and includes:
for sectors other than oil and gas under NZBA methodology)

Section 6.3.4
amended
Section 6.3.4
amended

Section 5.7 and
section 6.4
clarified
Section 5.7 and
section 6
clarified

Section 5.7
amended.

140

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Financed
emissions

Metrics –
Comments and
proposed
changes –
Portfolio
alignment
Metrics –
Comments and
proposed
changes – Share
of income

-

GHG emission intensity metrics can be misleading and should not be
required (variety of formulas for calculating relative emissions, intensity per euros is misleading, need to reduce absolute emissions)
- Extend emission coverage to include facilitated emissions
- Emissions targets to be differentiated to cover individual sectors, asset classes, and gases, as well as aggregated across portfolios, and
gases (by using the metric of CO2-equivalent).
- Consider a hierarchy with i. financed GHG emissions (absolute emissions, in tons CO2 equivalent, and where relevant in intensity per
unit of production, or by default, intensity of revenues, associated
with a portfolio) and ii. Current and forecasted (short, middle and
long-term) GHG emissions in absolute, and where relevant in intensity per unit of production, or, by default, in intensity such as per
million-euro revenues
- Set targets for the total emissions of the companies financed, both
at a sectoral and portfolio-wide level, without using an attribution
factor
Paragraph 94b) was subject to some comments:
- Clarify the definition of “production capacities operated by clients”
- Limit portfolio alignment metrics or replace them with sectoral alignment metrics
- Take into account the fact that (mis)alignment of a counterpart to a
given sectoral pathway might not be representative of the financial
risks it carries
Regarding 94c), respondents suggest to:
o Add the total share of income related to business with counterparties operating in sectors that highly contribute to nature degradation
o Add capex metrics for high-risk sectors, starting with coal, oil and gas
The metric might not allow the consideration of counterparty-specific factors
(e.g. best-in-class) or the nature of exposures.

Financed GHG emissions by scope 1, 2 and 3
emissions in absolute value and where relevant
intensity relative to units of production or
revenues, split by sectors, using a sectoral
differentiation as granular as possible and at least
for selected sectors determined on the basis of the
materiality assessment.
Institutions should complement this metric with
qualitative or quantitative information and
criteria supporting the interpretation of its
evolution, including any temporary increase due
to provision of transition finance to greenhouse
gas-intense counterparties, and identifying the
underlying drivers of emissions change.

Para. 94b) is now 81b) and includes:
Portfolio alignment metrics at sectoral level.
Institutions should complement this indicator with
information related to the assessment of potential
financial
risks
impacts
resulting
from
misalignments.

Section 5.7
amended

Production capacities operated by client may
capture physical output vs. emissions.
Para. 94c) is now 81a) and includes: a) Section 5.7
Amount and share of exposures to and amended
income.
A metric related to nature-related risks has
been included and a reference to monitoring
exposures to fossil fuel sector entities added.

141

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Metrics –
Comments and
proposed
changes –
Energy efficiency
of collaterals
Metrics –
Comments and
proposed
changes –
Engagement
with
counterparties

Metric –
Comments and

Regarding 94d), the following comments were made:
No mention of EPC anymore in the GLs.
o The lack of harmonization at EU level between EPC regulations is a Changed to:
strong limit to the use of this metric.
Energy efficiency.
o Banks could also assess the financed emissions of their real estate
assets (in addition to energy efficiency).

Section
amended

Paragraph 94e) could be amended to:
Para. 94e) is now 81e):
Clarification:
o Clarify the definitions of (positive) engagement and “percentage of
- Clarification: The percentage of counborrowers”
terparties for which an assessment of
o Show a more direct connection with counterparties’ transition plans
ESG risks has been performed, also as
(“including in relation to counterparties’ transition plans”)
regards their transition strategies
Counterparties:
and where available transition plans
o Reflect that engagement should be performed for companies that
- There is no concept of material client
need to take further transition actions (concentration of engagebut banks should determine, justify
ment on companies that are already sustainable would not mitigate
and document the scope of engagetransition risk)
ment
o Limit the metric to counterparties that have been identified as ma- A range of counterparty-specific acterial, are included in a portfolio subject to the alignment targets and
tions may be taken in line with secare on the top of the consideration of the level of services the bank
tion 5.1, this is reflected in follow-up
is providing to this counterpart
actions taken by the institution.
Metric:
o Add a metric for the engagement stage the companies are in and disclose the cases where engagement was unsuccessful and led to divestment
o Separate the metric into 2 indicators: (i) the first focusing on monitoring the engagement activities of the institution, (ii) the other focusing on monitoring the performance of counterparties
Evaluate progress observed over time against individual institution’s
transition plan assessment methodologies
Paragraph 96) proposed amendment:
Given the importance of both physical risks
and concentration risks (from a transition

Section 5.7
amended

Section 5.7
amended
142

5.7

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

proposed
changes –
Paragraph 96

Metrics –
Proposals for
new metrics

o

Regarding physical risks, institutions should perform a comprehensive assessment that distinguishes between chronic and acute risk
impacts, across various climate scenarios, as well as appropriate
granularity depending on the use case.
o Regarding ESG-related concentration risk, the work done is immature (the concept has not been yet defined in the regulation), which
could justify a phased implementation
The guidelines could impose new metrics, such as:
o Environment
o Sector-specific
o Indicators related to fossil fuel (e.g. forward-looking metrics regarding the total portfolio exposure to fossil fuels, including details about
how this breaks down according to fossil fuel type (coal, oil, gas),
value chain exposure (upstream, midstream, and storage), as well as
regional breakdowns where possible)
o An indicator on the sustainable power supply to fossil fuel financing
ratio (e.g. ESBR)
o Indicators on sustainable exposures and carbon-intensive exposures
mentioned in Section 5.8 paragraph 72
o Proportion of high emitting hard-to-abate sector exposure with and
without credible transition plans
o Portfolio alignment (by sector) with verified 1.5-degree goals and
with verified credible transition plans (verified externally)

o
o
o

o Others
Financial projections, including revenue, Capital Expenditures
(CAPEX) and Operational Expenditures (OPEX)
An indicator reflecting the Climate Value-at-Risk of counterparties
under a range of climate scenarios and across multiple time-horizons
Assessment of the emissions profile for mortgages and real estate
assets

and physical risks perspective), metrics
related to these risks are included in 5.7.

See response above on metrics included in Section 5.7
5.7.
amended
The GLs in paragraph 81 listing minimum
metrics is completed by paragraph 104:
-

Institutions should determine, taking
into account their business strategies
and risk appetite, which other riskbased and forward-looking metrics
and targets they will include in their
plans with a view to monitoring and
addressing ESG risks. This includes
assessing, computing and using metrics to evaluate the financial implications of transition planning for institutions’ business and risk profile

-

In addition, the Annex supporting
tool offers several examples of additional metrics spanning E, S & G

143

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

o
o
o
o
o

o

o

Proportion of “green” exposures with breakdown specifically to sustainable power solutions
Proportion of “transition” exposures with a comprehensive sciencebased definition
An indicator related to nature-related risks
An indicator related to the mitigation of physical risks
An indicator that requires to show the consistency between sustainability-related risk targets and impact targets
• Social & Governance
Indicators related to remuneration (e.g. proportion of individuals
with remuneration linked to transition plan progress) or training (e.g.
percentage of staff receiving transition plan-related training)
Indicators inspired by social and governance Principal Adverse Impact indicators of SFDR as well as social and governance metrics of
CSRD ESRS

Question 21: Climate and environmental scenarios and pathways
General
comments –
Proportionality

General
comments –
Binding nature

The requirements set in Section 6.4 might not be suitable for small and
medium-sized institutions. Paragraph 97 is seen as too detailed and
paragraph 97a should be the only paragraph formulated as binding for SNCIs.
As paragraph 98 requires a significant amount of information to fulfil these
requirements, the EBA should consider a phased approach to
implementation.

The Guidelines now provide that the
complexity of the scenarios should be
proportional to the size and complexity of
institutions. Non-large institutions may rely
on a simplified set of main parameters and
assumptions, included risks, time horizons
considered, and regional breakdown of
impacts.
The EBA should specify that the list of scenarios mentioned is representative The Guidelines do not preclude and even ask
and not mandatory. If scenarios are publicly recognized and science-based, banks to use public, science-based scenarios.
banks should be given more flexibility.
Scenarios may now be national on top of EU
or international. See also above on portfolio
alignment assessments.

Section 6.3.1
amended

Section 6.3.1
amended

144

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Type of
scenarios /
Suggestions for
adding new
scenarios

The EBA should consider including NGFS, IPCC and the scenarios used for the
Fit-for-55 exercise as sources for publicly available scenarios. The guidelines
should also explicitly mention that banks are allowed to develop their own
internally designed scenarios.
It could also be useful to encourage banks to also use worst-case scenarios
and clarify the need to use among the different scenarios those with high tail
risks.
The guidelines should also consider scenarios where financed NFCs won't be
able to timely achieve a transition that is fully aligned with benchmark one.
Risk management and strategic steering as different use cases for climate
scenarios and pathways would require banks to also consider “real-world”
projections of decarbonisation trajectories in addition to “normative”
pathways (such as the IEA Net zero emission scenario).
Moreover, the guidelines should specify that a uniform scenario does not
necessarily have to be used on a company-wide basis, as different
jurisdictions have different transition pathways.

See above on portfolio alignment methods.
Section 6.3.1
The guidelines now further emphasise that amended
banks should understand their sensitivity to
ESG risks under different scenarios and
understand how different scenarios may
affect their transition planning efforts.

Type of
scenarios /
Global vs.
regional
scenarios

The publicly available scenarios quoted do generally not provide regional
breakdowns (global scenarios). Reflecting geographical aspects and
granularity will require the consideration of additional or alternative
scenarios.
Moreover, national authorities often publish their own scenarios, which
might be more tailored to portfolios with a national focus. These scenarios in
line with EU objectives could offer valuable data.

Section 6.3.1
amended

Negative
emissions /
climate
overshoot

The EBA should provide clear guidance specifying that the methodology must
be based on a 1.5°C scenario with no or low overshoot and with limited
reliance of negative emissions.

Type of
scenarios /
Clarifications
expected from
the EBA

See above on the clarification regarding
consideration of different scenarios. In
addition, the Guidelines provide that the
geographical reference and granularity, such
as in terms of regional breakdowns, of the
scenarios and pathways used by institutions
should be relevant to their business model
and exposures.
See above for: national consideration,
geographical differences.
Furthermore, para. 95 provides: addressing
the specific environmental risks that may
stem from the process of adjustment
towards the climate and environmentalrelated regulatory objectives of the
jurisdictions where they operate.
Para. 95b) refers to para. 38, which requires
sectoral decarbonisation pathways to be
consistent with the applicable policy
objective, such as the EU objective to reach
net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 and to
reduce emissions by 55% by 2030 compared

Section 6.3.1
amended

No change

145

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Limitations in
the use of
scenarios

Transparency

to the 1990 level, or any national objective
where applicable.
In addition, methodological choices should
be justified and documented.
Each scenario comes with its own limitation Section 6.3.1
in both design and application. Banks should amended
understand implications of different
scenarios, as set out in these GLs and future
GLs on scenario analysis.

The guidelines should identify explicitly limitations in the use of scenarios.
The economic models used for climate scenarios analysis were developed to
deal with traditional financial risks and are not suitable for climate-related
risks. Tipping points and feedback mechanisms are not modelled and the
models ignore some severe impacts of climate change (sea-level rise,
migration, etc). The risks could therefore be underestimated.
Institutions should provide transparency on the underlying model choices Disclosure is out of scope but banks should No change
and assumptions.
justify and document their methodological
choices.

Question 22: Section 6.5 – transition planning
Structure &
relation with
other sections
Alignment of the
section with
GFANZ
framework
Engaging with
counterparties –
Clarifications
needed

The structure of Section 6.5 should be reviewed for further clarity. In The structure of section 6 has been reviewed
particular, the EBA could establish clearer links with sections 6.1 and 6.2, including to specify transition planning
whose themes are closely interrelated with transition planning.
aspects before setting out the key contents
of plans.
Section 6.5 could be aligned with the GFANZ framework by grouping Section 6.4 detailing the key contents of
paragraphs 101, 102, 104 and 105 under the heading “Implementation plans now includes two parts catering for
Strategy Section” and paragraph 103 as the “Engagement Strategy Section” implementation and engagement (para.
in order to provide a visible signal of international consistency.
109d) e)).
The guidelines should stress the importance of engagement as the main Section 6.4 includes requirements for
driver of a transition plan (as scope 3 represents most of a bank's emissions). engagement, including policies, processes
It would therefore seem worthwhile clarifying some of the EBA's and outcomes. See also response on section
expectations, including the definition of engagement, based on time-bound 5.1.
objectives and an escalation strategy (incl. exit strategy).

Engaging with
The requirements set by the EBA are too extensive (reviewing counterparties See
answers
provided
counterparties – transition plans is seen as very resource intensive, whereas banks could rely counterparties engagement.
Difficulties raised on ESG scores instead for instance).

above

Section 6
restructured

Section 6.4
amended

Section 6.4
amended

on Section 5.1 and
section 6
amended
146

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

counterparties
plans – Scope
too narrow
counterparties
plans – Scope
too large
counterparties
plans –
Verification of
counterparty
actions
Transition
planning
processes

The role of banks
in the transition

Requesting transition plans for only large counterparties might generate a
portfolio-level blind spot. Moreover, the exclusion of financial corporates in
paragraph 102 is not justified.
Difficulties with the engagement process were raised, including the fact that
it is not possible to engage with all clients. One way of solving this issue would
be to implement a phased approach. These difficulties are further
exacerbated for institutions that have a short-term lending business model.
External verification of counterparties transition plans should be encouraged
to enhance credibility. The plan should be accompanied by an annual Scope
1, 2 and 3 emissions inventory that is complete, accurate, transparent,
consistent, relevant and verified by a third party. Moreover, the guidelines
should define the way the bank entails course corrections when the plan is
proven infeasible.
Further details could be provided for certain aspects, such as clarification on
how to assess the implications of transition planning on the business and risk
profiles.
Transition planning processes could be presented more precisely, by
describing them as the collection of interoperable metrics from corporates
and setting interim targets.
Even though institutions play a key role in the transition process, the role
given to banks is too broad. Section 6.5 seems to suggest that the task of
transition is exclusively reserved for banks. It is therefore seen as too farreaching to ask banks to consider “adjustments to the product offering, the
agreement of an action plan and remediation measures to support an
improved transition path for the counterparty” (paragraph 103).

See answers provided above on the scope of Section 5.1 and
client engagement.
section 6
amended
See answers provided above on the scope of Section 5.1 and
client engagement.
section 6
amended
See answers provided above on the bank’s No change
responsibility to assess the risk profile of
counterparties.

Transition planning has been reviewed and Section 6
expanded.
amended
An expected roadmap with interim
objectives is present in 6.4

The guidelines and the range of actions listed No change
as potential risk management tools aim at
supporting banks’ safety and soundness,
including in the process of the transition.

Question 23: Level of granularity for the plans
Areas needing
more details

On top of answers stating “more details needed” without further precision, Transition planning (now section 6.3) has Section
respondents highlighted the need for more details on transition plan been fully revamped and their output (6.4) amended
credibility.
are specified with more details.

147

6

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Areas too
detailed (and
why)

In addition, sector (e.g. fossil fuels) commitments / action plan should be
more detailed, including carbon offsets management.
S&G would deserve more details.
Finally, inter alia, targets, governance, monitoring or materiality assessment
were cited as needing more details.
Few respondents thought the guidelines were too detailed with too many Para. 110 caters specifically for SNCIs with Section 6.4
rules and should remain high level – need for flexibility and principles-based less requirements in the plans content (6.4). amended
guidelines, especially on transition plan, decarbonisation strategies, ESG risk
metrics …
The guidelines were also deemed too detailed and overwhelming for SNCIs /
LSIs.

Question 24: Common format for the plans required by the CRD
General views

Improving
interoperability

The answers were quite polarised with most respondents asking for a
common format type of template, while other respondents having a negative
view on the proposal.
Many positive respondents did not elaborate except it would improve
interoperability with greater standardisation including proportionality for
SNCIs.
Induced qualities brought by a potential template were: Comparability;
Efficiency / cost; Consistency; Ease of approval / review
On the negative side, demand for flexibility dominates and a loose (or
NZBA’s) framework catering for every need is preferred.
There was no specific trend expressed on the structure or tool to be
considered for the common format but some features mostly around
interoperability.
Most of the ideas proposed invokes a starting or mixed format including
other EU requirements (at least CSRD / ESRS) to be complemented by CRD
plans or at least a conversion table between ESRS and EBA GL is mentioned.
Key is to align targets, metrics, KPIs…or at least leverage same data across
frameworks.

Taking into account the comments received, Annex included
the EBA has decided to include a supporting
tool for institutions in the Annex. This does
not introduce additional requirements but
provides for each key content required by the
guidelines some examples, references and
potential metrics that institutions may
consider as they structure and formalise their
plans. Institutions may adapt the format of
this common approach provided they ensure
that all required key contents are included in
their plans.
The annex supporting tool provides Annex included
references to CSRD / ESRS to foster
interconnections and consistency.

148

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Some respondents recall it is the transition plan expected role to unify the
frameworks.
Question 25: Other challenges
Capital neutrality

Risk
methodology
complexity

It is important to ensure that transition to a net zero economy is capital
neutral. Regulators have the opportunity to deliver capital relief to those
banks delivering on credible transition plans. A capital add-on only approach
for ESG risks will be a missed opportunity.
The guidelines propose a combination of methodologies, including exposurebased, portfolio-based, and scenario-based, to measure ESG risks.
Implementing and integrating these approaches might pose challenges due
to their complexity and the level of expertise required.
There should be sufficient clear instructions for banks to integrate ESG
factors into credit, market, operational risk models. With many of these
topics (outside of climate) being at early stage of development, we see a
potential risk that individual institutions will follow fairly different routes and
approaches.
Additional tools or frameworks, particularly for the complex methodologies
suggested for ESG risk assessment should be provided. Providing more
examples and use cases can certainly improve the understanding of the
document and facilitate the application of the rules by the institution.
More explicit guidance on predicting and preparing for future ESG risks,
including potential changes in technology, regulations, or industry practices
would help.

The Guidelines do not address supervisory No change
measures such as capital add-ons.

The
Guidelines provide
harmonised No change but
requirements on the types of methodologies, also see above
and main features for each type, to be used on section 4.2
by institutions to assess ESG risks. Given data
and
methodological
developments,
institutions should improve practices and
develop their own complementary methods
over time. Institutions remain responsible to
properly understand, assess and manage
risks they face, including ESG risks.

Question 26: Other comments

Supervisory gold
plating

As the EBA has already flagged that the Guidelines will be eventually The EBA SREP Guidelines will be addressed to No change
integrated into the SREP, institutions should not expect to have to meet a competent authorities and not include
secondary set of supervisory expectations on top of the Guidelines’ requirements for institutions.
requirements.
149

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Integrate
transition plans
in other sections

As transition plans are recognised by the Guidelines as a risk management
tool, provisions on transition plans should be integrated into the respective
sections on materiality assessment, risk management, monitoring,
governance, ILAAP and ICAAP - rather than being singled out in the section
6, which led to certain requirements being duplicative/overlapping.

Recognise
governance
structures
Mutualisation of
banks’ data
collection

The Guidelines should recognize differences in institutional setups and allow
room for implementation in accordance with existing governance structures.

Engagement
with
stakeholders

We recommend continuous engagement with industry stakeholders to keep
the Guidelines relevant and practical, including by involving employees and
trade unions in the development, implementation and update process of the
Guidelines.
The Public Administration (i.e. central governments, regional governments,
local authorities and public sector entities) should be considered ESG risk
neutral and therefore excluded from risk assessments for the following
reasons: high availability of public funds for climate emergencies, exclusion
of expenses for emergencies from public budget deficit, essential public
services mechanism, interventions to support public services continuity and
sustainability, exclusion from EU Taxonomy.
Regulatory risk could be added in the risk descriptions, as authorities and
politics increasingly seem to view the bank and finance industry as part of
the "solution" or a part of the toolbox. This results in increased obligations
and expectations for the industry also in non-bank regulations (e.g., the
building energy directive, potentially in the deforestation regulation, etc.).

Risk neutrality of
public
administration

Regulatory risk
to banks

In order to avoid high reporting burden for corporates, it could be relevant
to suggest financial institutions to rely on mutualization of efforts (e.g.
mutualized questionnaire, common initiatives…)?

The EBA has considered several options.
Integrating requirements on plans in a
dedicated section of the Guidelines allows to
provide clarity on all requirements, which
should be read in conjunction. Duplications
have been removed and cross-references
added.
The Guidelines should be applied by banks
regardless of their governance structure. See
Guidelines on internal governance.
The banking industry might explore such
avenue. The Guidelines list certain data
points to consider for the assessment of ESG
risks, hence supporting harmonisation.
The EBA engages with stakeholders and will
conduct public consultations in case of future
updates.

Section 6
amended

No change

No change

No change

Banks should assess ESG risks stemming from No change
exposures towards various types of
counterparties, taking into account specific
risk mitigating factors.

The Guidelines require banks to take into Section 6
account regulatory developments as part of clarified
risk management and transition planning.

150

FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ESG RISKS

Real economy
transition

UNGPs and
OECD MNE
Guidelines

The real economy is still at the beginning of its transitioning process. Hence, As part of the range of considerations to
ESG transition also in the financial sector remains a challenge, most likely support strategy and risk management
over several years to come. This needs to be taken into consideration.
decision-making, banks should consider the
real economy transition progress.
The UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs) and OECD The Guidelines require banks to implement Section 4.2
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (OECD MNE Guidelines) provide a due diligence processes with a view to amended
common reference point for responsible business conduct including as it assessing financial impacts stemming from S
relates to environment and social sustainability. All businesses, including and G factors, taking into account the
financial market participants, have a responsibility to respect human rights adherence of corporate counterparties to
and that should be implemented through a process of human rights due social and governance standards, including
diligence. The UNGPs and OECD MNE Guidelines have gained wide legitimacy the UNGPs and OECD MNE Guidelines.
and are referenced in ESG related EU regulation.

151

