TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Request for Proposals (RFP) Submittal Checklist……………….……………………………………..2
Instructions to Proposers………………………………………….…………………………………….3-6
General Conditions of Proposing and Terms of Contract……...…………………………………...7-11
Special Requirements/Instructions…………………………………………….………….…………12-13
Procurement Standards…………………………………………………………….…….…………..14-36
Certificate of Interested Parties Form 1295……………………………………………..……………...37
Conflict of Interest Questionnaire…………………………………………………..……………………38
Exhibits B, C, D, E, .…..……………………………...…………………………………….…………39-41
Scope of Work……………………………………………………………………………………….…42-45
Proposer Qualifications…………………………………………………………………………………...46
Evaluation Criteria…….………………………………………………………………………………..47-48
Schedule of RFP Events …………………………………………………………………….…………...49
Signature Page……………………………………………………………………………………………..50

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 1 of 50

RFP SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
The items checked below represent components comprising this proposal package. If the item IS NOT
checked, it is NOT APPLICABLE to this proposal. Proposers are asked to review the package to be
sure that all applicable parts are included. If any portion of the package is missing, notify the Auditor’s
Office immediately.
It is the Proposer’s responsibility to be thoroughly familiar with all Requirements and Specifications. Be
sure you understand the following before you return your RFP packet.
X

1.

Cover Sheet

X

2.

Table of Contents
This page is the Table of Contents

X

3.

Offer and Acceptance Form
This page to be sign and returned with RFP packet.

X

4.

General Requirements
You should be familiar with all of the General Requirements.

X

5.

Special Requirements/Instructions
Provides information you must know in order to make an offer properly.

X

6.

Specifications
Contains the detailed description of the product/service sought by the County.

X

7.

Pricing/Delivery Information
Used to solicit exact pricing of goods/services and delivery.

8.

Attachments

X

X

a.

Bid Guaranty & Performance Bond Information & Requirements
Applies only to certain bids/proposals. Read carefully and fill out completely.

b.

Bid Check Return Authorization Form
Applies only to certain forms. Read carefully and fill out completely.

c.

Vehicle Delivery Instructions
Included only when purchasing vehicles.

d.

Minimum Insurance Requirements
Included when applicable (does not supersede “Hold Harmless” section of
General Requirements).

e.

Workers’ Compensation Insurance Coverage Rule 110.110
Applicable for a building or construction contract.

f.

Financial Statement
When this information is required, you must use this form.

h.

Other – From 1295 and Form CIQ & Exhibits B-G
From time-to-time other attachments may be included.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 2 of 50

Instructions To Proposers
1.

Request for Proposal (RFP) Submission
A.

RFPs must be submitted in complete original form by mail or messenger to the
following address:
Leon County Auditor’s Office,
PO Box 898
113 West Main Street, 2ND Floor
Centerville, Texas 75833

2.

3.

B.

Proposals will be accepted at the above address until the time and date specified
herein and will be opened the same day.

C.

All proposals shall be tightly sealed in an envelope and plainly marked with the
Request for Proposal number, due date, and the proposer’s name and address.

D.

Late proposals will not be accepted and will be returned unopened to the proposer.

E.

All proposals submitted in response to this invitation shall become the property of
Leon County and will be a matter of public record available for review.

Preparation of Proposals
A.

The proposal shall be legibly printed in ink or typed.

B.

(1) Combined PDF Copy and Excel Spreadsheet(s) must be included on a USB
Flash Drive.

C.

If a unit price or extension already entered is to be altered, it shall be crossed out
and initialed in ink by the proposer.

D.

The proposal shall be legally signed and shall include the complete address of the
proposer.

Signatures
All proposals, notifications, claims, and statements must be signed by an individual
authorized to bind the proposer. The individual signing certifies, under penalty of perjury,
that he or she has the legal authorization to bind the proposer.

4.

Rejection or Withdrawal
Submission of additional terms, conditions or agreements with the proposal document
are grounds for deeming a proposal non-responsive and may result in proposal rejection.
Leon County reserves the right to reject any and all proposals and to waive any
informalities and minor irregularities or defects in proposals. Proposals may be
withdrawn in person by a proposer or authorized representative, provided their identity
is made known and a receipt is signed for the proposal, but only if the withdrawal is made
prior to the time set for receipt of proposals. Proposals are an irrevocable offer and may
not be withdrawn within 90 days after opening date.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 3 of 50

5.

Award
The proposal(s) will be awarded to the responsible, responsive proposer(s) whose
proposal, conforming to the solicitation, will be most advantageous to Leon County – all
factors considered. Please see evaluation criteria contained within this RFP. Any
proposer who is in default to Leon County at the time of submittal of the proposal shall
have that proposal rejected. Leon County reserves the right to clarify any contractual
terms with the concurrence of the Contractor; however, any substantial nonconformity
in the offer, as determined by Leon County, shall be deemed non-responsive and the
offer rejected.
In evaluating proposals, Leon County shall consider the qualifications of the proposers,
and, where applicable, operating costs, delivery time, maintenance requirements,
performance data, and guarantees of materials and equipment. In addition, Leon County
may conduct such investigation as it deems necessary to assist in the evaluation of a
proposal and to establish the responsibility, qualifications, and financial ability of the
proposers to fulfill the contract.
Leon County reserves the right to award this contract on the basis of best value in
accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, to waive any formality or irregularity, to
make awards to more than one offeror, and/or to reject any or all proposals.
While the successful proposer(s) will receive a letter of intent from Leon County
acknowledging selection for partnership development and support, the partnership
agreement will be contingent upon funding success.

6.

Contract
Upon evaluation and selection by the Leon County Commissioners’ Court, the County
reserves the right to negotiate and execute a formal partnership agreement with the
selected Proposer(s). While the successful proposer(s) will receive a letter of intent from
Leon County acknowledging selection for partnership development, the agreement is
contingent upon further agreement and funding success through the BEAD program.
The partnership agreement shall not create any financial obligation or commitment of
funds by Leon County. No County funding will be provided or exchanged under this
agreement.

7.

RFP Results
RFP results are not provided in response to telephone inquiries. The final tabulation will
be posted on the county website www.co.leon.tx.us after Commissioners’ Court
decision.

8.

Changes and Addenda to Proposal Documents
Each change or addendum issued in relation to this RFP document will be on file in the
Auditor’s Office. In addition, to the extent possible, copies will be mailed to each person
registered as having received a set of proposal documents. It shall be the proposer’s
responsibility to make inquiry as to change or addenda issued. All such changes or
addenda shall become part of the contract and all proposers shall be bound by such
addenda. Information on all changes or addenda issued will be available at the Auditor’s
Office.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 4 of 50

9.

Specifications
Unless otherwise stated by the proposer, the proposal will be considered as being in
accordance with Leon County’s applicable standard specifications, and any special
specifications outlined in the RFP document. References to a particular trade name,
manufacturer’s catalogue, or model number are made for descriptive purposes to guide
the proposer in interpreting the requirements of Leon County and should not be
construed as excluding proposals on other types of materials, equipment, and supplies.
However, the proposer, if awarded a contract, will be required to furnish the particular
item referred to in the specifications or description unless departure or substitution is
clearly noted and described in the proposal. Leon County reserves the right to determine
if equipment/product being proposed is an acceptable alternate. All goods shall be new
unless otherwise so stated in the proposal. Any unsolicited alternate proposal, or any
changes, insertions, or omissions to the terms and conditions, specifications, or any
other requirements of the proposal, may be considered non-responsive.

10.

Interpretation of Proposal and/or Contract Documents
All inquiries shall be made within a reasonable time prior to the date and time fixed for
the proposal opening, in order that a written response in the form of an addendum, if
required, can be processed before the proposals are opened. Inquiries received that are
not made in a timely fashion may or may not be considered.

11.

Currency
Prices calculated by the proposer shall be stated in U.S. dollars.

12.

HB 1295
By law, vendor must complete a new Form 1295 for every contract with the Texas
Ethics Commission (“TEC”). The TEC website can be accessed at
http://www.ethics.state.tx.us/file/. Business entities MUST complete a new Form
1295 online prior to contracting with Leon County for every contract. Upon
completing the form, the TEC website will generate a PDF version of the business
entity’s Form 1295, including creating a unique “Certificate Number” for every contract
that will be stamped in the upper right hand corner of the form. The business entity must
then sign a hard copy of the form and submit it to Leon County with the submitted
proposal documents. Failure to submit Form 1295 with proposal documents will
result in disqualification. Example of this form can be found on Page 53.

13.

Conflict of Interest Questionnaire
Vendor must complete a new Conflict of Interest (CIQ) Questionnaire for every
contract if there is a conflict between the vendor and Leon County. A signed copy
must be returned with the submitted proposal documents. If there is no conflict,
please notate such on the CIQ form and return with proposal documents. This form
can be accessed at https://www.ethics.state.tx.us/forms/CIQ. Example of this form
can be found on Page 54.

14.

Certification
By signing the offer section of the Offer and Acceptance page, proposer certifies:

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 5 of 50

A.

The submission of the offer did not involve collusion or other anti-competitive
practices.

B.

The proposer has not given, offered to give, nor intends to give at any time
hereafter, any economic opportunity, future employment, gift, loan, gratuity, special
discount, trip, favor, or service to a public servant in connection with the submitted
offer.

C.

The proposer hereby certifies that the individual signing the proposal is an
authorized agent for the proposer and has the authority to bind the proposer to
the contract.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 6 of 50

GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
RFP AND TERMS OF CONTRACT
By execution of this document, the vendor accepts all general and special conditions
of the contract as outlined below and, in the specifications and plans.

1.

Proposing
A.

Proposals
All proposals must be submitted with all specified content furnished in this package.
Paper size must be standard 8.5’’ x 11” paper format. One (1) USB Flash Drive must
be provided in the proposal submission. Please include any detailed specifications
on proposed items within the proposal package.

B.

Authorized Signatures
The proposal must be executed personally by the vendor, duly authorized partner
of the partnership, or duly authorized officer of the corporation. If executed by an
agent, a power of attorney or other evidence of authority to act on behalf of the
vendor shall accompany the proposal to become a valid proposal.

C.

Late Proposals
Proposals must be in the Auditor’s Office before or at the specified time and date
proposals are due. Proposals received after the submission deadline shall be
rejected as non-responsive.

D.

Withdrawal of Proposals Prior to RFP Opening
A proposal may be withdrawn before the opening date by submitting a written
request to the Auditor’s Office. If time allows the proposer may submit a new
proposal. Proposer assumes full responsibility for submitting a new proposal
before or at the specified time and date proposals are due. Leon County reserves
the right to withdraw a request for proposals before the opening date.

E.

Withdrawal of Proposals after RFP Opening
Proposer agrees that its offer may not be withdrawn or cancelled by the vendor for
a period of ninety (90) days following the date and time designated for the receipt
of proposals unless otherwise stated in the proposal and/or specifications.

F.

Exceptions and/or Substitutions
All proposals meeting the intent of the specifications and plans will be considered
for award. Vendors taking exception to the specifications and plans, or offering
substitutions, shall state these exceptions in the section provided. If a proposal is
made on an article other than the one specified, which a proposer considers
comparable, the name and grade of said article must be specified and sufficient
specifications and descriptive data must accompany same to permit thorough

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 7 of 50

evaluation. The absence of stated exceptions and/or substitutions shall indicate
that the vendor has not taken any exceptions to the specifications and shall be
responsible to perform in strict accordance with the specifications. As a matter of
practice, Leon County rejects exception(s) and/or substitutions as non-responsive
but reserves the right to accept any and/or all of the exception(s) and/or
substitution(s) deemed to be in the best interest of Leon County.
G.

Proposal Alterations
Proposals cannot be altered or amended after submission deadline. Any
interlineations, alterations, or erasures made before opening time must be initialed
by the signer of the proposal, guaranteeing authenticity.

H.

RFP Award
Award of contract shall be made to the most responsible, responsive proposer,
whose offer is determined to be the best value and receives funding through the
Texas Broadband Development Office’s BEAD program. Leon County reserves
the right to be the sole judge as to whether the proposal will serve the purpose
intended. Leon County reserves the right to accept or reject in part or in whole any
proposal submitted, and to waive any technicalities or informalities for the best
interest of the County. Leon County reserves the right to award based upon
individual line items, or sections.

I.

Addenda
Any interpretations, corrections or changes to the specifications and plans will be
made by addenda no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the RFP opening.
Addenda will be distributed to all known recipients of proposal documents. Vendors
shall acknowledge receipt of all addenda with submission of their RFP.

J.

General Insurance Requirements
Failure to furnish Affidavit of Insurance, if required in these specifications, will result
in proposal being declared non-responsive. Non-responsive proposals will not be
considered for award.

K.

Responsiveness
A responsive proposal shall substantially conform to the requirements of this
Request for Proposal and/or specifications contained herein. Proposers who
substitute any other terms, conditions, specifications and/or requirements or who
qualify their proposals in such a manner as to nullify or limit their liability to the
contracting entity shall have their proposals deemed non-responsive. Also,
proposals containing any clause that would limit contracting authority shall be
considered non-responsive. Examples of non-responsive proposals include but
shall not be limited to a) proposals that fail to conform to required delivery
schedules as set forth in the proposal request; b) proposals with prices qualified in
such a manner that the proposal price cannot be determined, such as with vague
wording that may include “price in effect at the time of delivery,” and c) proposals
made contingent upon award of other proposals currently under consideration.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 8 of 50

L.

Responsible Standing of Proposer
To be considered for award, proposer must at least: have the ability to obtain
adequate financial resources, be able to comply with required or proposed
delivery/completion schedule, have a satisfactory record of performance; have a
satisfactory record of integrity and ethics, and be otherwise qualified and eligible
to receive award.

M.

Proprietary Data
Proposer may, by written request, indicate as confidential any portion(s) of a
proposal that contain proprietary information, including manufacturing and/or
design processes exclusive to the vendor. Leon County will protect from public
disclosure such portions of a proposal, unless directed otherwise by legal authority,
including existing Open Records Acts.

N.

Public RFP Opening
Proposers are invited to be present at the opening of proposals. After the official
opening of proposals, a period of not less than one week is necessary to evaluate
proposals. The amount of time necessary for proposal evaluation may vary and is
determined solely by the County. Following the RFP evaluation, all proposals
submitted are available for public review.

2.

PERFORMANCE
A.

Compliance with Federal, State, County, and Local Laws
Proposals must comply with all federal, state, county, and local laws, including, but
not limited to, all applicable standard safety, emission, and noise control
requirements. Any vehicles or equipment shall contain all standard safety,
emission, and noise control requirements required for the types and sizes of
equipment at the time of their manufacture. The contractor agrees, during the
performance of work or service, to comply with all applicable codes and ordinances
of Leon County or the State of Texas as they may apply, as these laws may now
read, or as they may hereafter be changed or amended.

B.

OSHA
The proposer will certify all equipment complies with all regulations and conditions
stipulated under the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1971,
as amended. The successful proposer will further certify that all items furnished
under this project will conform and comply with federal and State of Texas OSHA
standards. The successful proposer will agree to indemnify and hold harmless
Leon County for any and all damages that may be assessed against the County.

C.

Patents and Copyrights
The successful vendor agrees to protect the County from claims involving
infringements of patents and/or copyrights.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 9 of 50

3.

CONTRACT
A.

Contract Agreement
Once a proposer is selected, the partnership agreement shall commence on the
date of award of BEAD funding.

B.

Change Order
No different or additional terms will become part of this contract with the exception
of a change order. No oral statement of any person shall modify or otherwise
change, or affect the terms, conditions or specifications stated in the resulting
contract. All change orders to the contract will be made in writing and at the
discretion and approval of Leon County. No change order will be binding unless
signed by an authorized representative of the County and the vendor.

C.

Termination for Default
Leon County reserves the right to enforce the performance of this contract in any
manner prescribed by law or deemed to be in the best interest of the County in the
event of breach or default of this contract. Leon County reserves the right to
terminate the contract immediately in the event the vendor fails to perform to the
terms of specifications or fails to comply with the terms of this contract. Breach of
contract or default authorizes the County to award to another vendor, purchase
elsewhere, and charge the full increase in cost and handling to the defaulting party.

D.

Invalid, Illegal, or Unenforceable Provisions
In case any one or more of the provisions contained in the Contract shall for any
reason be held to be invalid, illegal, or unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity,
illegality, or unenforceability shall not affect any other provision thereof and this
contract shall be considered as if such invalid, illegal, or unenforceable provision
had never been contained herein.

E.

Injuries or Damages Resulting from Negligence
Successful vendor shall defend, indemnify and save harmless Leon County and all
its officers, agents and employees from all suits, actions, or other claims of any
character, name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or
damages received or sustained by any person, persons, or property on account of
any negligent act or fault of the successful vendor, or of any agent, employee,
subcontractor or supplier in the execution of, or performance under, any contract
which may result from RFP award. Successful vendor shall pay any judgment with
cost which may be obtained against Leon County growing out of such injury or
damages.

F.

Interest by Public Officials

G.

No public official shall have an interest in this contract, in accordance with the
Texas Local Government Code.
Uniform Commercial Code
The successful vendor and Leon County agree that both parties have all rights,

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 10 of 50

duties, and remedies available as stated in the Uniform Commercial Code.
H.

Venue
This agreement will be governed and construed according to the laws of the State
of Texas. This agreement is performable in the County of Leon, Texas.

I.

Sale, Assignment, or Transfer of Contract
The successful vendor shall not sell, assign, transfer or convey this contract, in
whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Leon County.

J.

Silence of Specifications
The apparent silence of these specifications as to any detailed description
concerning any point, shall be regarded as meaning that only the best commercial
practices are to prevail. All interpretations of these specifications shall be made on
the basis of this statement.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 11 of 50

SPECIAL
REQUIREMENTS/INSTRUCTIONS
The following requirements and instructions supersede General Requirements where
applicable.
1.

RFP Requirement
Each proposer should submit as a bid this entire RFP, completed where necessary, for
example, the RFP cover sheet, the Price Sheets, etc. Use an opaque envelope, clearly
indicating on the outside the Job Number, Job Description, and marked “SEALED RFP” &
2025-335. Leon County shall not be responsible for any effort or cost expended in the
preparation of a response to this RFP. All protests should be coordinated through the
Auditor’s Office prior to award recommendation to Commissioners’ Court.

2.

Delivery Time
Proposal shall show number of days in advance required to place aggregate services at the
County’s designated locations. Failure to state delivery time may cause proposal to be
rejected. The county has the right to extend delivery time if reason appears valid.

3.

Minimum Insurance Requirements
A.

The contractor shall, at all times during the term of this contract, maintain insurance
coverage with not less than the type and requirements shown below. Such insurance
is to be provided at the sole cost of the contractor. These requirements do not
establish limits of the contractor’s liability.

B.

All policies of insurance shall waive all rights of subrogation against the County, its
officers, employees, and agents.

C.

Successful proposer shall be required, at his or her own expense, to furnish the Leon
County Auditor’s Office within ten (10) days of notification of award with certified
copies of all insurance policies, or certificates of insurance for General Liability,
Workers Compensation, and Vehicle insurance coverage to be in force throughout
the term of the contract. Leon County shall be named as an additional “INSURED”.
All insurance shall be in accordance with the governing federal, state, or local laws.

D.

The County reserves the right to require additional insurance should it deem
necessary.

E.

Workers’ Compensation (with Waiver of subrogation to Leon County), Employer’s
Liability, including all states, and other endorsements, if applicable to the Project.
Statutory, and Bodily Injury by Accident: $100,000 each employee. Bodily Injury by
Disease: $500,000 policy limit $100,000 each employee. Leon County shall be named
as “additional insured” on workers’ compensation policy.

F.

Commercial General Liability Occurrence Form including, but not limited to, Premises
and Operations, Products Liability Broad Form Property Damage, Contractual
Liability, Personal and Advertising Injury Liability and where the exposure exists,
coverage for watercraft, blasting collapse, and explosions, blowout, cratering and

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 12 of 50

underground damage.
$500,000 each occurrence Limit Bodily Injury and Property Damage Combined
$500,000 Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit $500,000 Per Job
Aggregate $500,000 Personal and Advertising Injury Limit. Leon County shall be
named as “additional insured” on commercial general liability policy.
G. Automobile Liability Coverage: $300,000 Combined Liability Limits. Bodily Injury and
Property Damage Combined. Leon County shall be named as “additional insured” on
automobile policy.
4.

Exceptions/Substitutions
All proposals meeting the intent of this proposal will be considered for award. Proposers
taking exception to the specifications, or offering substitutions, shall state these exceptions
in the section provided or by attachment as part of the proposal. The absence of such a list
shall indicate that the proposer has not taken exceptions and shall hold the proposer
responsible to perform in strict accordance with the specifications of the proposal. Leon
County Commissioners Court reserves the right to accept any/or all/none of the
exception(s)/substitution(s) deemed to be in the best interest of the County.

5.

Sam.gov
Proposer(s) must not be debarred at the time of submission and complete the attached
‘Non-Debarment Self Certification’ Form. Prior to award, the offeror must provide proof
of registration, active/good standing and non-debarment status in the System for Award
Management. SAM.gov will be checked prior to award of the contract. If a proposer is
not registered with SAM.gov, or the offeror is debarred, then the offeror’s proposal will
not be evaluated.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 13 of 50

Federally Funded Contracts
Procurement Standards and Associated Matters
The County of Leon follows the procurement standards in 2 CFR 200.317 – 2CFR 200.327
and Appendix II to Part 200 for procurement actions to be funded with Federal funds. All
attempts are made to adhere to these policies and procedures and updates are made as
needed. The entirety of the language found in 2 CFR 200.317 – 2 CFR 200.327 may not be
applicable in all instances, programs, and/or situations. This document contains the most
current 2 CFR 200.317 – 2 CFR
200.327 language available at the adoption of these policies and procedures.
9.1

General Procurement Standards

Depending on the specific funding source of the procurement request, solicitation efforts by
Leon County utilizing Federal funding are subject to additional procurement standards. 2 CFR
PART 200
- UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND
AUDIT REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS, and 24 CFR 85.36 PROCUREMENT (U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT (HUD) affect or may affect
procurement requirements and mandate various contract terms. The foregoing listing
is not exhaustive.
Special Note: As well relevant procurement standards on previous disaster recovery
assistance projects may be found at 44 C.F.R. 13.36 (a)-(i) (States, local, and tribal
governments), or other sources.
Procedures for Federally funded solicitations must include all required Federal
clauses and language.
9.2 Sections 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.317- 200.326
These sections impose requirements for federally funded contracts across a broad range of
granting agencies. The County, a non-Federal entity and generally a subrecipient in these
grant programs, is subject to these requirements. Sections 200.318 through 200.326, as
such regulations exist on the date of the Auditor’s Office adoption of these policies, follow:
§200.317 Procurements by states
When procuring property and services under a Federal award, a State must follow the same
policies and procedures it uses for procurements from its non-Federal funds. The State will
comply with §§200.321, 200.322, and 200.323 and ensure that every purchase order or other
contract includes any clauses required by §200.327. All other non-Federal entities, including
subrecipients of a State, must follow the procurement standards in §§200.318 through
200.327.
§200.318 General procurement standards
(a)

The non-Federal entity must have and use documented procurement procedures,

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 14 of 50

consistent with State, local, and tribal laws and regulations and the standards of this
section, for the acquisition of property or services required under a Federal award or
subaward. The non-Federal entity's documented procurement procedures must
conform to the procurement standards identified in §§200.317 through 200.327.
(b)
Non-Federal entities must maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform
in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of their contracts or
purchase orders.
(c)(1) The non-Federal entity must maintain written standards of conduct covering conflicts
of interest and governing the actions of its employees engaged in the selection,
award, and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent may
participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by a
Federal award if he or she has a real or apparent conflict of interest. Such a conflict
of interest would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or
her immediate family, his or her partner, or an organization which employs or is about
to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or other interest in or a
tangible personal benefit from a firm considered for a contract. The officers,
employees, and agents of the non-Federal entity may neither solicit nor accept
gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors or parties to
subcontracts. However, non-Federal entities may set standards for situations in
which the financial interest is not substantial, or the gift is an unsolicited item of
nominal value. The standards of conduct must provide for disciplinary actions to be
applied for violations of such standards by officers, employees, or agents of the nonFederal entity.
(2)
If the non-Federal entity has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization that
is not a State, local government, or Indian tribe, the non-Federal entity must
also maintain written standards of conduct covering organizational conflicts of
interest. Organizational conflicts of interest means that because of
relationships with a parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, the
non-Federal entity is unable or appears to be unable to be impartial in
conducting a procurement action involving a related organization.
(d)
The non-Federal entity's procedures must avoid acquisition of unnecessary or
duplicative items. Consideration should be given to consolidating or breaking out
procurements to obtain a more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an
analysis will be made of lease versus purchase alternatives, and any other
appropriate analysis to determine the most economical approach.
(e)
To foster greater economy and efficiency, and in accordance with efforts to promote
cost- effective use of shared services across the Federal Government, the nonFederal entity is encouraged to enter into state and local intergovernmental
agreements or inter-entity agreements where appropriate for procurement or use of
common or shared goods and services. Competition requirements will be met with
documented procurement actions using strategic sourcing, shared services, and other
similar procurement arrangements.
(f)
The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use Federal excess and surplus property in
lieu of purchasing new equipment and property whenever such use is feasible and
reduces project costs.
(g)
The non-Federal entity is encouraged to use value engineering clauses in contracts
for construction projects of sufficient size to offer reasonable opportunities for cost
reductions. Value engineering is a systematic and creative analysis of each contract
item or task to ensure that its essential function is provided at the overall lower cost.
(h)
The non-Federal entity must award contracts only to responsible contractors
possessing the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of a

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 15 of 50

(i)

(j)(1)

(k)

proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to such matters as contractor
integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past performance, and financial
and technical resources. See also §200.214.
The non-Federal entity must maintain records sufficient to detail the history of
procurement. These records will include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following: Rationale for the method of procurement, selection of contract type,
contractor selection or rejection, and the basis for the contract price.
The non-Federal entity may use a time-and-materials type contract only after a
determination that no other contract is suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling
price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Time-and-materials type contract
means a contract whose cost to a non-Federal entity is the sum of:
(i)
The actual cost of materials; and
(ii)
Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect wages,
general and administrative expenses, and profit.
(2)
Since this formula generates an open-ended contract price, a time-andmaterials contract provides no positive profit incentive to the contractor for
cost control or labor efficiency. Therefore, each contract must set a ceiling
price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Further, the non-Federal
entity awarding such a contract must assert a high degree of oversight in order
to obtain reasonable assurance that the contractor is using efficient methods
and effective cost controls.
The non-Federal entity alone must be responsible, in accordance with good
administrative practice and sound business judgment, for the settlement of all
contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements. These issues
include, but are not limited to, source evaluation, protests, disputes, and claims. These
standards do not relieve the non-Federal entity of any contractual responsibilities
under its contracts. The Federal awarding agency will not substitute its judgment for
that of the non-Federal entity unless the matter is primarily a Federal concern.
Violations of law will be referred to the local, state, or Federal authority having proper
jurisdiction.

[85 FR 49543, Aug. 13, 2020, as amended at 86 FR 10440, Feb. 22, 2021]
§200.319 Competition
(a)
(b)

All procurement transactions for the acquisition of property or services required
under a Federal award must be conducted in a manner providing full and open
competition consistent with the standards of this section and §200.320.
In order to ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive
advantage, contractors that develop or draft specifications, requirements, statements
of work, or invitations for bids or requests for proposals must be excluded from
competing for such procurements. Some of the situations considered to be restrictive
of competition include, but are not limited to:
(1)
Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify
to do business;
(2)
Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;
(3)
Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies;
(4)
Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts;
(5)
Organizational conflicts of interest;
(6)
Specifying only a “brand name” product instead of allowing “an equal” product
to be offered and describing the performance or other relevant requirements

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 16 of 50

(c)

(d)

of the procurement; and
(7)
Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
The non-Federal entity must conduct procurements in a manner that prohibits the
use of statutorily or administratively imposed state, local, or tribal geographical
preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in those cases where
applicable Federal statutes expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference.
Nothing in this section preempts state licensing laws. When contracting for
architectural and engineering (A/E) services, geographic location may be a selection
criterion provided its application leaves an appropriate number of qualified firms,
given the nature and size of the project, to compete for the contract.
The non-Federal entity must have written procedures for procurement transactions.
These procedures must ensure that all solicitations:
(1)
Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for
the material, product, or service to be procured. Such description must not, in
competitive procurements, contain features which unduly restrict competition.
The description may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the
material, product, or service to be procured and, when necessary, must set
forth those minimum essential characteristics and standards to which it must
conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications should
be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to make a
clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a “brand name
or equivalent” description may be used as a means to define the performance
or other salient requirements of procurement. The specific features of the
named brand which must be met by offers must be clearly stated; and
(2)

(e)

(f)

Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors
to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
The non-Federal entity must ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms, or
products which are used in acquiring goods and services are current and include
enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. Also, the
non-Federal entity must not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the
solicitation period.
Noncompetitive procurements can only be awarded in accordance with §200.320(c).

§200.320 Methods of procurement to be followed
The non-Federal entity must have and use documented procurement procedures,
consistent with the standards of this section and §§200.317, 200.318, and 200.319 for any
of the following methods of procurement used for the acquisition of property or services
required under a Federal award or sub-award.
(a)
Informal procurement methods. When the value of the procurement for property or
services under a Federal award does not exceed the simplified acquisition threshold
(SAT), as defined in §200.1, or a lower threshold established by a non-Federal entity,
formal procurement methods are not required. The non-Federal entity may use
informal procurement methods to expedite the completion of its transactions and
minimize the associated administrative burden and cost. The informal methods used
for procurement of property or services at or below the SAT include:
(1)
Micro-purchases
(i)
Distribution. The acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate
dollar amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold
(See the definition of micro-purchase in §200.1). To the maximum

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 17 of 50

(a)
(b)
(c)

extent practicable, the non-Federal entity should distribute micropurchases equitably among qualified suppliers.
(ii)
Micro-purchase awards. Micro-purchases may be awarded without
soliciting competitive price or rate quotations if the non-Federal entity
considers the price to be reasonable based on research, experience,
purchase history or other information and documents it files
accordingly. Purchase cards can be used for micro-purchases if
procedures are documented and approved by the non-Federal entity.
(iii)
Micro-purchase thresholds. The non-Federal entity is responsible for
determining and documenting an appropriate micro-purchase
threshold based on internal controls, an evaluation of risk, and its
documented procurement procedures. The micro-purchase threshold
used by the non- Federal entity must be authorized or not prohibited
under State, local, or tribal laws or regulations. Non-Federal entities
may establish a threshold higher than the Federal threshold
established in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR)
(https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-48/chapter- 1/subchapter-A/part2/subpart-2.1) in accordance with paragraphs (a)(1)(iv) and (v) of this
section.
(iv)
Non-Federal entity increases to the micro-purchase threshold up to
$50,000. Non-Federal entities may establish a threshold higher than
the micro-purchase threshold identified in the FAR in accordance
with the requirements of this section. The non-Federal entity may
self-certify a threshold up to $50,000 on an annual basis and must
maintain documentation to be made available to the Federal
awarding agency and auditors in accordance with §200.334. The
self-certification must include a justification, clear identification of the
threshold, and supporting documentation of any of the following:
A qualification as a low-risk auditee, in accordance with the criteria in §200.520 for the
most recent audit;
An annual internal institutional risk assessment to identify, mitigate, and manage
financial risks; or,
For public institutions, a higher threshold consistent with State law.
(v)
Non-Federal entity increases to the micro-purchase threshold over
$50,000. Micro-purchase thresholds higher than $50,000 must be
approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The non-federal
entity must submit a request with the requirements included in
paragraph (a)(1)(iv) of this section. The increased threshold is valid
until there is a change in status in which the justification was approved.
(2)
Small purchases
(i)
Small purchase procedures. The acquisition of property or
services, the aggregate dollar amount of which is higher than
the micro- purchase threshold but does not exceed the
simplified acquisition threshold. If small purchase procedures
are used, price or rate quotations must be obtained from an
adequate number of qualified sources as determined
appropriate by the non-Federal entity.
(ii)
Simplified acquisition thresholds. The non-Federal entity is
responsible for determining an appropriate simplified
acquisition threshold based on internal controls, an evaluation

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 18 of 50

(b)

(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

of risk and its documented procurement procedures which must
not exceed the threshold established in the FAR. When
applicable, a lower simplified acquisition threshold used by the
non-Federal entity must be authorized or not prohibited under
State, local, or tribal laws or regulations.
Formal procurement methods. When the value of the procurement for property or
services under a Federal financial assistance award exceeds the SAT, or a lower
threshold established by a non-Federal entity, formal procurement methods are
required. Formal procurement methods require following documented procedures.
Formal procurement methods also require public advertising unless a non-competitive
procurement can be used in accordance with §200.319 or paragraph (c) of this
section. The following formal methods of procurement are used for procurement of
property or services above the simplified acquisition threshold or a value below the
simplified acquisition threshold the non-Federal entity determines to be appropriate:
(1)
Sealed bids. A procurement method in which bids are publicly solicited and a
firm fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible
bidder whose bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the
invitation for bids, is the lowest in price. The sealed bids method is the
preferred method for procuring construction if the conditions meet the
following criterion:
(i)
In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following
conditions should be present:
A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase description is available;
Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete effectively
for the business; and
The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract and the selection
of the successful bidder can be made principally on the basis of price.
(ii)
If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:
Bids must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources, providing
them sufficient response time prior to the date set for opening the bids, for local,
and tribal governments, the invitation for bids must be publicly advertised;
The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications and pertinent attachments,
must define the items or services in order for the bidder to properly respond;
All bids will be opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids,
and for local and tribal governments, the bids must be opened publicly;
A firm fixed price contract award will be made in writing to the lowest responsive
and responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding documents, factors such as
discounts, transportation cost, and life cycle costs must be considered in
determining which bid is lowest. Payment discounts will only be used to
determine the low bid when prior experience indicates that such discounts are
usually taken advantage of; and
Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented reason.
(2)
Proposals. A procurement method in which either a fixed price or costreimbursement type contract is awarded. Proposals are generally used
when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. They are
awarded in accordance with the following requirements:
(i)
Requests for proposals must be publicized and identify all
evaluation factors and their relative importance. Proposals must
be solicited from an adequate number of qualified offerors. Any
response to publicized requests for proposals must be
considered to the maximum extent practical;

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 19 of 50

(ii)

(d)

The non-Federal entity must have a written method for
conducting technical evaluations of the proposals received
and making selections;
(iii)
Contracts must be awarded to the responsible offeror whose
proposal is most advantageous to the non-Federal entity, with
price and other factors considered; and
(iv)
The non-Federal entity may use competitive proposal
procedures
for
qualifications-based
procurement
of
architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby
offeror's qualifications are evaluated, and the most qualified
offeror is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable
compensation. The method, where price is not used as a
selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E
professional services. It cannot be used to purchase other types
of services though A/E firms that are a potential source to
perform the proposed effort.
Noncompetitive procurement. There are specific circumstances in which
noncompetitive procurement can be used. Noncompetitive procurement can only
be awarded if one or more of the following circumstances apply:
(1)
The acquisition of property or services, the aggregate dollar amount of which
does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold (see paragraph (a)(1) of this
section);
(2)
The item is available only from a single source;
(3)
The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not permit a
delay resulting from publicizing a competitive solicitation;
(4)
The Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes a
noncompetitive procurement in response to a written request from the nonFederal entity; or
(5)
After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.

§200.321 Contracting with small and minority businesses, women's business
enterprises, and labor surplus area firms
(a)
(b)

The non-Federal entity must take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that
minority businesses, women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms
are used when possible.
Affirmative steps must include:
(1)
Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women's business
enterprises on solicitation lists;
(2)
Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women's business
enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;
(3)
Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into smaller tasks
or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and minority
businesses, and women's business enterprises;
(4)
Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits, which
encourage participation by small and minority businesses, and women's
business enterprises;
(5)

Using the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such organizations
as the Small Business Administration and the Minority Business
Development Agency of the Department of Commerce; and

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 20 of 50

(6)

Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, to take the
affirmative steps listed in paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) of this section.3

§200.322 Domestic preferences for procurements
(a)

(b)

As appropriate and to the extent consistent with law, the non-Federal entity should, to
the greatest extent practicable under a Federal award, provide a preference for the
purchase, acquisition, or use of goods, products, or materials produced in the United
States (including but not limited to iron, aluminum, steel, cement, and other
manufactured products). The requirements of this section must be included in all
subawards including all contracts and purchase orders for work or products under this
award.
For purposes of this section:
(1)
“Produced in the United States” means, for iron and steel products, that all
manufacturing processes, from the initial melting stage through the
application of coatings, occurred in the United States.
(2)
“Manufactured products” means items and construction materials composed
in whole or in part of non-ferrous metals such as aluminum; plastics and
polymer- based products such as polyvinyl chloride pipe; aggregates such as
concrete; glass, including optical fiber; and lumber.

§200.323 Procurement of recovered materials
A non-Federal entity that is a state agency or agency of a political subdivision of a state and
its contractors must comply with section 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The requirements of Section 6002 include
procuring only items designated in guidelines of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
at 40 CFR part 247 that contain the highest percentage of recovered materials practicable,
consistent with maintaining a satisfactory level of competition, where the purchase price of
the item exceeds $10,000 or the value of the quantity acquired during the preceding fiscal
year exceeded $10,000; procuring solid waste management services in a manner that
maximizes energy and resource recovery; and establishing an affirmative procurement
program for procurement of recovered materials identified in the EPA guidelines.
§200.324 Contract cost and price
(a)

(b)

(c)

The non-Federal entity must perform a cost or price analysis in connection with
every procurement action in excess of the Simplified Acquisition Threshold
including contract modifications. The method and degree of analysis is dependent
on the facts surrounding the particular procurement situation, but as a starting
point, the non-Federal entity must make independent estimates before receiving
bids or proposals.
The non-Federal entity must negotiate profit as a separate element of the price for
each contract in which there is no price competition and, in all cases, where cost
analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit, consideration must be
given to the complexity of the work to be performed, the risk borne by the contractor,
the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record of
past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for
similar work.
Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under the Federal award are
allowable only to the extent that costs incurred, or cost estimates included in

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 21 of 50

(d)

negotiated prices would be allowable for the non-Federal entity under subpart E of
this part. The non-Federal entity may reference its own cost principles that comply
with the Federal cost principles.
The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost
methods of contracting must not be used.

§200.325 Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity review
(a)

(b)

(c)

The non-Federal entity must make available, upon request of the Federal awarding
agency or pass-through entity, technical specifications on proposed procurements
where the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity believes such review is
needed to ensure that the item or service specified is the one being proposed for
acquisition. This review generally will take place prior to the time the specification is
incorporated into a solicitation document. However, if the non-Federal entity desires
to have the review accomplished after a solicitation has been developed, the Federal
awarding agency or pass-through entity may still review the specifications, with such
review usually limited to the technical aspects of the proposed purchase.
The non-Federal entity must make available upon request, for the Federal awarding
agency or pass-through entity pre-procurement review, procurement documents, such
as requests for proposals or invitations for bids, or independent cost estimates, when:
(1)
The non-Federal entity's procurement procedures or operation fails to
comply with the procurement standards in this part;
(2)
The procurement is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition Threshold
and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is received in
response to a solicitation;
(3)
The procurement, which is expected to exceed the Simplified Acquisition
Threshold, specifies a “brand name” product;
(4)
The proposed contract is more than the Simplified Acquisition Threshold and
is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under a sealed bid
procurement; or
(5)
A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract or
increases the contract amount by more than the Simplified Acquisition
Threshold.
The non-Federal entity is exempt from the pre-procurement review in paragraph (b)
of this section if the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity determines that
its procurement systems comply with the standards of this part.
(1)
The non-Federal entity may request that its procurement system be reviewed
by the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity to determine whether
its system meets these standards in order for its system to be certified.
Generally, these reviews must occur where there is continuous high-dollar
funding, and third-party contracts are awarded on a regular basis;
(2)
The non-Federal entity may self-certify its procurement system. Such selfcertification must not limit the Federal awarding agency's right to survey the
system. Under a self-certification procedure, the Federal awarding agency
may rely on written assurances from the non-Federal entity that it is complying
with these standards. The non-Federal entity must cite specific policies,
procedures, regulations, or standards as being in compliance with these
requirements and have its system available for review.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 22 of 50

§200.326 Bonding requirements
For construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the
Simplified Acquisition Threshold, the Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may
accept the bonding policy and requirements of the non-Federal entity provided that the
Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity has made a determination that the
Federal interest is adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the
minimum requirements must be as follows:
(a)
A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of the bid price. The “bid
guarantee” must consist of a firm commitment such as a bid bond, certified check, or
other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will,
upon acceptance of the bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required
within the time specified.
(b)
(c)

A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price.
A “performance bond” is one executed in connection with a contract to secure
fulfillment of all the contractor's requirements under such contract.
A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of the contract price.
A “payment bond” is one executed in connection with a contract to assure
payment as required by law of all persons supplying labor and material in the
execution of the work provided for in the contract.

§200.327 Contract provisions
The non-Federal entity's contracts must contain the applicable provisions described in
Appendix II to this part.
9.3

2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II

Appendix II to Part 200 - Contract Provisions for Non-Federal Entity Contracts
Under Federal Awards
In addition to other provisions required by the Federal agency or non-Federal entity, all
contracts made by the non-Federal entity under the Federal award must contain provisions
covering the following, as applicable.
(a)
Contracts for more than the simplified acquisition threshold, which is the inflation
adjusted amount determined by the Civilian Agency Acquisition Council and the
Defense Acquisition Regulations Council (Councils) as authorized by 41 U.S.C. 1908,
must address administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances where
contractors violate or breach contract terms, and provide for such sanctions and
penalties as appropriate.
(b)
All contracts in excess of $10,000 must address termination for cause and for
convenience by the non-Federal entity including the manner by which it will be affected
and the basis for settlement.
(c)
Equal Employment Opportunity. Except as otherwise provided under 41 CFR Part
60, all contracts that meet the definition of “federally assisted construction contract”
in 41 CFR Part 60-1.3 must include the equal opportunity clause provided under 41
CFR 60-1.4(b), in accordance with Executive Order 11246, “Equal Employment
Opportunity” (30 FR 12319, 12935, 3 CFR Part, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339), as
amended by Executive Order 11375, “Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to
Equal Employment Opportunity,” and implementing regulations at 41 CFR part 60,

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 23 of 50

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

“Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity,
Department of Labor.”
Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 3141-3148). When required by Federal
program legislation, all prime construction contracts in excess of $2,000 awarded by
non-Federal entities must include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act
(40 U.S.C. 3141- 3144, and 3146-3148) as supplemented by Department of Labor
regulations (29 CFR Part 5, “Labor Standards Provisions Applicable to Contracts
Covering Federally Financed and Assisted Construction”). In accordance with the
statute, contractors must be required to pay wages to laborers and mechanics at a
rate not less than the prevailing wages specified in a wage determination made by the
Secretary of Labor. In addition, contractors must be required to pay wages not less
than once a week. The non-Federal entity must place a copy of the current prevailing
wage determination issued by the Department of Labor in each solicitation. The
decision to award a contract or subcontract must be conditioned upon the acceptance
of the wage determination. The non-Federal entity must report all suspected or
reported violations to the Federal awarding agency. The contracts must also include
a provision for compliance with the Copeland “Anti-Kickback” Act (40 U.S.C. 3145), as
supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR Part 3, “Contractors and
Subcontractors on Public Building or Public Work Financed in Whole or in Part by
Loans or Grants from the United States”). The Act provides that each contractor or
subrecipient must be prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed
in the construction, completion, or repair of public work, to give up any part of the
compensation to which he or she is otherwise entitled. The non-Federal entity must
report all suspected or reported violations to the Federal awarding agency.
Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 3701-3708). Where
applicable, all contracts awarded by the non-Federal entity in excess of $100,000
that involve the employment of mechanics or laborers must include a provision for
compliance
with 40 U.S.C. 3702 and 3704, as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations
(29 CFR Part 5). Under 40 U.S.C. 3702 of the Act, each contractor must be required
to compute the wages of every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard work
week of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard work week is permissible provided
that the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than one and a half times the basic
rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in the work week. The
requirements of 40 U.S.C.
3704 are applicable to construction work and provide that no laborer or mechanic
must be required to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are
unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous. These requirements do not apply to the
purchases of supplies or materials or articles ordinarily available on the open market,
or contracts for transportation or transmission of intelligence.
Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement. If the Federal award meets
the definition of “funding agreement” under 37 CFR § 401.2 (a) and the recipient or
subrecipient wishes to enter into a contract with a small business firm or nonprofit
organization regarding the substitution of parties, assignment or performance of
experimental, developmental, or research work under that “funding agreement,” the
recipient or subrecipient must comply with the requirements of 37 CFR Part 401,
“Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms
Under Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements,” and any
implementing regulations issued by the awarding agency.
Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q.) and the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387), as amended - Contracts and subgrants of amounts in

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 24 of 50

(h)

(i)

excess of $150,000 must contain a provision that requires the non-Federal award to
agree to comply with all applicable standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to
the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401-7671q) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251-1387). Violations must be reported to the Federal
awarding agency and the Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA).
Debarment and Suspension (Executive Orders 12549 and 12689) - A contract award
(see 2 CFR 180.220) must not be made to parties listed on the governmentwide
exclusions in the System for Award Management (SAM), in accordance with the OMB
guidelines at 2 CFR 180 that implement Executive Orders 12549 (3 CFR part 1986
Comp., p. 189) and 12689 (3 CFR part 1989 Comp., p. 235), “Debarment and
Suspension.” SAM Exclusions contains the names of parties debarred, suspended, or
otherwise excluded by agencies, as well as parties declared ineligible under statutory
or regulatory authority other than Executive Order 12549.
Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment (31 U.S.C. 1352) - Contractors that apply or bid for
an award exceeding $100,000 must file the required certification. Each tier certifies to
the tier above that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any
person or organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee
of any agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an
employee of a member
of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other
award covered by 31 U.S.C. 1352. Each tier must also disclose any lobbying with
non-Federal funds that takes place in connection with obtaining any Federal award.
Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the non-Federal award.

(j)
See§ 200.323*
(k)
See§ 200.216**
(l)
See § 200.322***
*§ 200.323 Procurement of recovered materials
A non-Federal entity that is a state agency or agency of a political subdivision of a state, and
its contractors must comply with section 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The requirements of Section 6002 include
procuring only items designated in guidelines of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
at 40 CFR part 247 that contain the highest percentage of recovered materials practicable,
consistent with maintaining a satisfactory level of competition, where the purchase price of
the item exceeds $10,000 or the value of the quantity acquired during the preceding fiscal
year exceeded $10,000; procuring solid waste management services in a manner that
maximizes energy and resource recovery; and establishing an affirmative procurement
program for procurement of recovered materials identified in the EPA guidelines.
**§ 200.216 Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video surveillance
services or equipment
(a)

Recipients and sub-recipients are prohibited from obligating or expending loan or
grant funds to:
(1)
Procure or obtain;

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 25 of 50

(2)
(3)

(b)

(c)
(d)

Extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain; or
Enter into a contract (or extend or renew a contract) to procure or obtain
equipment, services, or systems that uses covered telecommunications
equipment or services as a substantial or essential component of any system,
or as critical technology as part of any system. As described in Public Law
115-232, section 889, covered telecommunications equipment is
telecommunications equipment produced by Huawei Technologies Company
or ZTE Corporation (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities).
(i)
For the purpose of public safety, security of government facilities,
physical security surveillance of critical infrastructure, and other
national security purposes, video surveillance and telecommunications
equipment produced by Hytera Communications Corporation,
Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company, or Dahua
Technology Company (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities).
(ii)
Telecommunications or video surveillance services provided by such
entities or using such equipment.
(iii)
Telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services
produced or provided by an entity that the Secretary of Defense, in
consultation with the Director of the National Intelligence or the Director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, reasonably believes to be an
entity owned or controlled by, or otherwise connected to, the
government of a covered foreign country.
In implementing the prohibition under Public Law 115-232, section 889, subsection
(f), paragraph (1), heads of executive agencies administering loan, grant, or subsidy
programs shall prioritize available funding and technical support to assist affected
businesses, institutions and organizations as is reasonably necessary for those
affected entities to transition from covered communications equipment and services,
to procure replacement equipment and services, and to ensure that communications
service to users and customers is sustained.
See Public Law 115-232, section 889 for additional information.
See also § 200.471.

***§ 200.322 Domestic preferences for procurements
(a)

(b)

As appropriate and to the extent consistent with law, the non-Federal entity should, to
the greatest extent practicable under a Federal award, provide a preference for the
purchase, acquisition, or use of goods, products, or materials produced in the United
States (including but not limited to iron, aluminum, steel, cement, and other
manufactured products). The requirements of this section must be included in all
subawards including all contracts and purchase orders for work or products under this
award.
For purposes of this section:
(1)
“Produced in the United States” means, for iron and steel products, that all
manufacturing processes, from the initial melting stage through the application of
coatings, occurred in the United States.
(2)
“Manufactured products” means items and construction materials composed
in whole or in part of non-ferrous metals such as aluminum; plastics and
polymer- based products such as polyvinyl chloride pipe; aggregates such as
concrete; glass, including optical fiber; and lumber.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 26 of 50

9.4

Additional Contract Requirements Remedies

(a)

Standard: Contracts for more than the simplified acquisition threshold ($150,000)
must address administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances where
contractors violate or breach contract terms and provide for such sanctions and
penalties as appropriate. See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II, A.
Applicability: This requirement applies to all FEMA grant and cooperative
agreement programs.

(b)

Termination for Cause and Convenience
(a)
(b)

All contracts in excess of $10,000 must address termination for cause and for
convenience by the nonfederal entity including the manner by which it will be affected
and the basis for settlement. See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II, B.
Applicability. This requirement applies to all FEMA grant and cooperative
agreement programs.

Equal Employment Opportunity
(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

Standard. Except as otherwise provided under 41 C.F.R. Part 60, all contracts that
meet the definition of "federally assisted construction contract" in 41 C.F.R. § 60-1.3
must include the equal opportunity clause provided under 41 C.F.R. § 60-1.4(b), in
accordance with Executive Order 11246, Equal Employment Opportunity (30 Fed.
Reg. 12319, 12935, 3
C.F.R. Part, 1964-1965 Comp., p. 339), as amended by Executive Order 11375,
Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity, and
implementing regulations at 41 C.F.R. Part 60 (Office of Federal Contract Compliance
Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor). See 2 C.F.R. Part
200, Appendix II, C.
Key Definitions.
(1)
Federally Assisted Construction Contract. The regulation at 41 C.F.R. § 60·1.3
defines a "federally assisted construction contract'' as any agreement or
modification thereof between any applicant and a person for construction work
which is paid for in whole or in part with funds obtained from the Government
or borrowed on the credit of the Government pursuant to any Federal program
involving a grant, contract, loan, insurance, or guarantee, or undertaken
pursuant to any Federal program involving such grant, contract, loan,
insurance, or guarantee, or any application or modification thereof approved
by the Government for a grant, contract, loan, insurance, or guarantee under
which the applicant itself participates in the construction work.
(2)
Construction Work. The regulation at 41 C.F.R. § 60-1.3 defines "construction
work" as the construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension,
demolition or repair of buildings, highways, or other changes or improvements
to real property, including facilities providing utility services. The term also
includes the supervision, inspection, and other onsite functions incidental to
the actual construction.
Applicability. This requirement applies to all FEMA grant and cooperative
agreement programs.
The regulation at 41 C.F.R. Part 60·1.4(b) requires the insertion of the following
contract clause: "During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 27 of 50

follows:
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. The
contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed,
and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Such action shall include, but not
be limited to the following: Employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer;
recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or
other forms of compensation; and selection for training, including
apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available
to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided setting
forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed
by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified applicants will receive
considerations for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin.
The contractor will send to each labor union or representative of workers with
which he has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or
understanding, a notice to be provided advising the said labor union or workers'
representatives of the contractor's commitments under this section and shall
post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and
applicants for employment.
The contractor will comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246
of September 24, 1965, and of the rules, regulations, and relevant
orders of the Secretary of Labor.
The contractor will furnish all information and reports required by Executive
Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and by rules, regulations, and orders
of the Secretary of Labor, or pursuant thereto, and will permit access to his
books, records, and accounts by the administering agency and the Secretary
of Labor for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with such
rules, regulations, and orders.
In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the nondiscrimination
clauses of this contract or with any of the said rules, regulations, or orders, this
contract may be canceled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part and
the contractor may be declared ineligible for further Government contracts or
federally assisted construction contracts in accordance with procedures
authorized in Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and such other
sanctions as may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Executive
Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation, or order of the
Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
The contractor will include the portion of the sentence immediately preceding
paragraph (1) and the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (7) in every
subcontract or purchase order unless exempted by rules, regulations, or
orders of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to section 204 of Executive
Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding
upon each subcontractor or vendor. The contractor will take such action with
respect to any subcontract or purchase order as the administering agency may
direct as a means of enforcing such provisions, including sanctions for
noncompliance: Provided, however, that in the event a contractor becomes
involved in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 28 of 50

result of such direction by the administering agency the contractor may request
the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the
United States."
Davis Bacon Act and Copeland Anti-Kickback Act
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Applicability of Davis-Bacon Act. The Davis-Bacon Act only applies to the emergency
Management Preparedness Grant Program, Homeland Security Grant Program,
Nonprofit Security Grant Program, Tribal Homeland Security Grant Program, Port
Security Grant Program, and Transit Security Grant Program. It does not apply to
other FEMA grant and cooperative agreement programs, including the Public
Assistance Program.
All prime construction contracts in excess of $2,000 awarded by non-Federal entities
must include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. §§
3141-3144 and 3146-3148) as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations at
29 C.F.R. Part 5 (Labor Standards Provisions Applicable to Contracts Covering
Federally Financed and Assisted Construction)). See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II,
D.
In accordance with the statute, contractors must be required to pay wages to laborers
and mechanics at a rate not less than the prevailing wages specified in a wage
determination made by the Secretary of Labor. In addition, contractors' must be
required to pay wages not less than once a week.
The non-Federal entity must place a copy of the current prevailing wage determination
issued by the Department of Labor in each solicitation. The decision to award a
contract or subcontract must be conditioned upon the acceptance of the wage
determination. The non- Federal entity must report all suspected or reported violations
to the Federal awarding agency.
In contracts subject to the Davis-Bacon Act, the contracts must also include a
provision for compliance with the Copeland "Anti-Kickback" Act (40 U.S.C. §3145), as
supplemented by Department of Labor regulations at 29 C.F.R. Part 3 (Contractors
and Subcontractors on Public Building or Public Work Financed in Whole or in Part by
Loans or Grants from the United States). The Copeland Anti-Kickback Act provides
that each contractor or subrecipient must be prohibited from inducing, by any means,
any person employed in the construction, completion, or repair of public work, to give
up any part of the compensation to which he or she is otherwise entitled. The nonFederal entity must report all suspected or reported violations to FEMA.
The regulation at 29 C.F.R. § 5.S(a) does provide the required contract clause that
applies to compliance with both the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts. However, as
discussed in the previous subsection, the Davis-Bacon Act does not apply to Public
Assistance recipients and subrecipients. In situations where the Davis-Bacon Act does
not apply, neither does the Copeland "Anti-Kickback Act." However, for purposes of
grant programs where both clauses do apply, FEMA requires the following contract
clause:

"Compliance with the Copeland "Anti-Kickback" Act
(1)
(2)

Contractor. The contractor shall comply with 18 U.S.C. § 874, 40 U.S.C. §
3145, and the requirements of 29 C.F.R. pt. 3 as may be applicable, which
are incorporated by reference into this contract.
Subcontracts. The contractor or subcontractor shall insert in any subcontracts
the clause above and such other clauses as the FEMA may by appropriate

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 29 of 50

(3)

instructions require, and also a clause requiring the subcontractors to include
these clauses in any lower tier subcontracts. The prime contractor shall be
responsible for the compliance by any subcontractor or lower tier
subcontractor with all of these contract clauses.
Breach. A breach of the contract clauses above may be grounds for
termination of the contract, and for debarment as a contractor and
subcontractor as provided in 29
C.F.R. § 5.12."

Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act
(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Applicability: This requirement applies to all FEMA grant and cooperative
agreement programs.
Where applicable (see 40 U.S.C. § 3701), all contracts awarded by the non-Federal
entity in excess of $100,000 that involve the employment of mechanics or laborers
must include a provision for compliance with 40 U.S.C. §§ 3702 and 3704, as
supplemented by Department of Labor regulations at 29 C.F.R. Part 5. See 2 C.F.R.
Part 200, Appendix II, E.
Under 40 U.S.C. § 3702, each contractor must be required to compute the wages of
every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard work week of 40 hours. Work
in excess of
the standard work week is permissible provided that the worker is compensated at a
rate of not less than one and a half times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in
excess of 40 hours in the work week.
The requirements of 40 U.S.C. § 3704 are applicable to construction work and
provide that no laborer or mechanic must be required to work in surroundings or
under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous. These
requirements do not apply to the purchases of supplies or materials or articles
ordinarily available on the open market, or contracts for transportation or transmission
of intelligence.
The regulation at 29 C.F.R. § 5.5(b) provides the required contract clause concerning
compliance with the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act: "Compliance
with the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act''
(1)
Overtime requirements. No contractor or subcontractor contracting for any part
of the contract work which may require or involve the employment of laborers
or mechanics shall require or permit any such laborer or mechanic in any
workweek in which he or she is employed on such work to work in excess of
forty hours in such workweek unless such laborer or mechanic receives
compensation at a rate not less than one and one-half times the basic rate of
pay for all hours worked in excess of forty hours in such workweek.
(2)
Violation; liability for unpaid wages; liquidated damages. I n the event of any
violation of the clause set forth in paragraph (1) of this section the contractor
and any subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable for the unpaid
wages. In addition, such contractor and subcontractor shall be liable to the
United States (in the case of work done under contract for the District of
Columbia or a territory, to such District or to such territory), for liquidated
damages. Such liquidated damages shall be computed with respect to each
individual laborer or mechanic, including watchmen and guards, employed in
violation of the clause set forth in paragraph (1) of this section, in the sum of
$10 for each calendar day on which such individual was required or permitted

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 30 of 50

(3)

(4)

to work in excess of the standard workweek of forty hours without payment of
the overtime wages required by the clause set forth in paragraph
(1) of this section.
Withholding for unpaid wages and liquidated damages. The write in the name
of the Federal agency or the loan or grant recipient) shall upon its own action
or upon written request of an authorized representative of the Department of
Labor withhold or cause to be withheld, from any moneys payable on account
of work performed by the contractor or subcontractor under any such contract
or any other Federal contract with the same prime contractor, or any other
federally-assisted contract subject to the Contract Work Hours and Safety
Standards Act, which is held by the same prime contractor, such sums as may
be determined to be necessary to satisfy any liabilities of such contractor or
subcontractor for unpaid wages and liquidated damages as provided in the
clause set forth in paragraph (2) of this section.
Subcontracts. The contractor or subcontractor shall insert in any subcontracts
the clauses set forth in paragraph (1) through (4) of this section and also a
clause requiring the subcontractors to include these clauses in any lower tier
subcontracts. The prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any
subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with the clauses set forth in
paragraphs (1) through (4) of this section."

Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement
(a)

Stafford Act Disaster Grants. This requirement does not apply to the Public
Assistance, Hazard Mitigation Grant Program, Fire Management Assistance Grant
Program, Crisis Counseling Assistance and Training Grant Program, Disaster Case
Management Grant Program, and Federal Assistance to Individuals and Households
- Other Needs Assistance Grant Program, as FEMA awards under these programs
do not meet the definition of "funding agreement."

(b)

lf the FEMA award meets the definition of "funding agreement" under 37 C.F.R.
§401.2(a) and the non-Federal entity wishes to enter into a contract with a small
business firm or nonprofit organization regarding the substitution of parties,
assignment or performance of experimental, developmental, or research work under
that "funding agreement," the non- Federal entity must comply with the requirements
of 37 C.F.R. Part 401 (Rights to Inventions Made by Nonprofit Organizations and
Small Business Firms Under Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative
Agreements), and any implementing regulations issued by FEMA. See 2 C.F.R. Part
200, Appendix II, F.
The regulation at 37 C.F.R. §401.2(a) currently defines "funding agreement" as any
contract, grant, or cooperative agreement entered into between any Federal agency,
other than the Tennessee Valley Authority, and any contractor for the performance of
experimental, developmental, or research work funded in whole or in part by the
Federal government. This term also includes any assignment, substitution of parties,
or subcontract of any type entered into for the performance of experimental,
developmental, or research work under a funding agreement as defined in the first
sentence of this paragraph.

(c)

Clean Air Act and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Contracts of amounts in excess of $150,000 must contain a provision that requires the

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 31 of 50

contractor to agree to comply with all applicable standards, orders, or regulations issued
pursuant to the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401-7671q) and the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251- 1387). Violations must be reported to FEMA
and the Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency. See 2 C.F.R. Part 200,
Appendix II, 11 G.
(a)
The following provides a sample contract clause concerning compliance for
contracts of amounts in excess of $150,000: "Clean Air Act"
(1)
The contractor agrees to comply with all applicable standards, orders or
regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §
7401 et seq.
(2)
The contractor agrees to report each violation to the (name of the state agency
or local or Indian tribal government) and understands and agrees that the
(name of the state agency or local or Indian tribal government) will, in turn,
report each violation as required to assure notification to the (name of
recipient), Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the appropriate
Environmental Protection Agency Regional Office.
(3)
The contractor agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract
exceeding
$150,000 financed in whole or in part with Federal assistance provided by
FEMA.
"Federal Water Pollution Control Act"
(1)
(2)

(3)

The contractor agrees to comply with all applicable standards, orders or
regulations issued pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
The contractor agrees to report each violation to the (name of the state agency
or local or Indian tribal government) and understands and agrees that the
(name of the state agency or local or Indian tribal government) will, in turn,
report each violation as required to assure notification to the (name of
recipient), Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the appropriate
Environmental Protection Agency Regional Office.
The contractor agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract
exceeding
$150,000 financed in whole or in part with Federal assistance provided by
FEMA."

Debarment and Suspension
(a)
(b)

(c)

Applicability: The federal debarment and suspension provisions apply to all federal
granting agencies.
Non-federal entities and contractors are subject to the debarment and suspension
regulations implementing Executive Order 12549, Debarment and Suspension
(1986) and Executive Order 12689, Debarment and Suspension (1989) at 2 C.F.R.
Part 180 and the Department of Homeland Security's regulations at 2 C.F.R. Part
3000 (Non-procurement Debarment and Suspension).
These regulations restrict awards, sub-awards, and contracts with certain parties that
are debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for participation in
Federal assistance programs and activities. See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II, if H;
and Procurement Guidance for Recipients and Subrecipients Under 2 C.F.R. Part 200
(Uniform Rules): Supplement to the Public Assistance Procurement Disaster

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 32 of 50

(d)

(e)

(f)

Assistance Team (POAT) Field Manual Chapter IV, 6.d, and Appendix C, 2
[hereinafter POAT Supplement]. A contract award must not be made to parties listed
in the SAM Exclusions. SAM Exclusions is the list maintained by the General Services
Administration that contains the names of parties debarred, suspended, or otherwise
excluded by agencies, as well as parties declared ineligible under statutory or
regulatory authority other than Executive Order 12549. SAM exclusions can be
accessed at www.sam.gov. See 2 C.F.R. § 180.530; POAT Supplement, Chapter IV,
6.d and Appendix C,
In general, an "excluded" party cannot receive a Federal grant award or a contract
within the meaning of a "covered transaction," to include subawards and
subcontracts. This includes parties that receive Federal funding indirectly, such as
contractors to recipients and subrecipients. The key to the exclusion is whether there
is a "covered transaction," which is any non-procurement transaction (unless
excepted) at either a "primary" or "secondary" tier. Although "covered transactions"
do not include contracts awarded by the Federal Government for purposes of the
non-procurement common rule and DHS's implementing regulations, it does include
some contracts awarded by recipients and subrecipients.
Specifically, a covered transaction includes the following contracts for goods or services:
(1)
The contract is awarded by a recipient or subrecipient in the amount of at least
$25,000.
(2)
The contract requires the approval of FEMA, regardless of amount.
(3)
The contract is for federally required audit services.
(4)
A subcontract is also a covered transaction if it is awarded by the contractor
of a recipient or subrecipient and requires either the approval of FEMA or is in
excess of
$25,000.
The following provides a debarment and suspension clause. It incorporates an
optional method of assurances that contractors are not excluded or disqualified:

Suspension and Debarment
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

This contract is a covered transaction for purposes of 2 C.F.R. pt. 180 and 2
C.F.R. pt. 3000. As such the contractor is required to verify that none of the
contractor, its principals (defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.995), or its affiliates
(defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.905) are excluded (defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.940)
or disqualified (defined at 2
C.F.R. § 180.935).
The contractor must comply with 2 C.F.R. pt. 180, subpart C and 2 C.F.R. pt.
3000, subpart C and must include a requirement to comply with these
regulations in any lower tier covered transaction it enters into.
This certification is a material representation of fact relied upon by (insert name
of subrecipient). If it is later determined that the contractor did not comply with
2 C.F.R. pt. 180, subpart C and 2 C.F.R. pt. 3000, subpart C, in addition to
remedies available to (name of state agency serving as recipient and name of
subrecipient), the Federal Government may pursue available remedies,
including but not limited to suspension and/or debarment.
The bidder or proposer agrees to comply with the requirements of 2 C.F.R.
pt. 180, subpart C and 2 C.F.R. pt. 3000, subpart C while this offer is valid
and throughout the period of any contract that may arise from this offer. The
bidder or proposer further agrees to include a provision requiring such
compliance in its lower tier covered transactions."

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 33 of 50

Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment
(a)
(b)

Applicability: This requirement applies to all FEMA grant and cooperative
agreement programs.
Contractors that apply or bid for an award of $100,000 or more must file the
required certification.

See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Appendix II, 11 l; 44 C.F.R. Part 18; POAT Supplement, Chapter
IV, 6.c; Appendix C, 4.
(c)

(d)

Each tier certifies to the tier above that it will not and has not used Federal
appropriated funds to pay any person or organization for influencing or attempting to
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a member of Congress, officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a member of Congress in connection with
obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other award covered by 31 U.S.C. §1352.
Each tier must also disclose any lobbying with non-Federal funds that takes place in
connection with obtaining any Federal award. Such disclosures are forwarded from
tier to tier up to the non-Federal award. See PDAT Supplement, Chapter IV, 6.c and
Appendix C, 4.
The following provides a Byrd Anti-Lobbying contract clause: "Byrd Anti-Lobbying
Amendment, 31 U.S.C. § 1352 (as amended) Contractors who apply or bid for an
award of
$100,000 or more shall file the required certification. Each tier certifies to the tier above
that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or
organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any
agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of
a member of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant, or any
other award covered by 31U.S.C. §1352. Each tier shall also disclose any lobbying
with non-Federal funds that takes place in connection with obtaining any Federal
award. Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the recipient.''

DHS Seal, Logo, and Flags
(a)

(b)

All non-Federal entities must place in their contracts a provision that a contractor
shall not use the DHS seal(s), logos, crests, or reproductions of flags or likenesses
of DHS agency officials without specific FEMA pre-approval. See DHS Standard
Terms and Conditions, v 3.0, XXV (2013).
The following provides a contract clause regarding DHS Seal, Logo, and Flags:
"The contractor shall not use the DHS seal(s), logos, crests, or reproductions
of flags or likenesses of DHS agency officials without specific FEMA preapproval".

Compliance with Federal Law, Regulations, and Executive Orders
(a)

(b)

All non-Federal entities must place into their contracts an acknowledgement that
FEMA financial assistance will be used to fund the contract along with the
requirement that the contractor will comply with all applicable federal law,
regulations, executive orders, and FEMA policies, procedures, and directives.
The following provides a contract clause regarding Compliance with Federal
Law, Regulations, and Executive Orders: "This is an acknowledgement that

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 34 of 50

FEMA financial assistance will be used to fund the contract only. The contractor
will comply with all applicable federal law, regulations, executive orders, FEMA
policies, procedures, and directives."
No Obligation by Federal Government
(a)

(b)

The non-Federal entity must include a provision in its contract that states that the
Federal Government is not a party to the contract and is not subject to any obligations
or liabilities to the non-Federal entity, contractor, or any other party pertaining to any
matter resulting from the contract.
The following provides a contract clause regarding no obligation by the Federal
Government: "The Federal Government is not a party to this contract and is not
subject to any obligations or liabilities to the non-Federal entity, contractor, or any
other party pertaining to any matter resulting from the contract."

Program Fraud and False or Fraudulent Statements or Related Acts
(a)
(b)

The non-Federal entity must include a provision in its contract that the contractor
acknowledges that 31U.S.C. Chap. 38 (Administrative Remedies for False
Claims and Statements) applies to its actions pertaining to the contract.
The following provides a contract clause regarding Fraud and False or Fraudulent or
Related Acts: "The contractor acknowledges that 31 U.S.C. Chap. 38 (Administrative
Remedies for False Claims and Statements) applies to the contractor's actions
pertaining to this contract."

9.5 Appendix A, 44 C.F.R. Part 18- Certification Regarding Lobbying
Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements (To be submitted
with each bid or offer exceeding $100,000). The undersigned [Contractor] certifies, to the
best of his or her knowledge, that:
(1)
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf
of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an
officer or employee of an agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any
Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any
cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal,
amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement.
(2)
If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be
paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or
employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of
Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this
Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned shall
complete and submit Standard Form LLL, "Disclosure Form to Report
Lobbying," in accordance with its instructions.
(3)
The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included
in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts,
subgrants, and contracts under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements)
and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly. This
certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 35 of 50

when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification
is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction imposed by 31,
U.S.C. § 1352 (as amended by the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995). Any
person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such
failure. The Contractor certifies or affirms the truthfulness and accuracy of each
statement of its certification and disclosure, if any.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 36 of 50

PLEASE COMPLETE AND SIGN THIS CIQ FORM IF THERE IS A CONFLICT OF INTEREST
BETWEEN THE PROPOSER AND LEON COUNTY. IF THERE IS NO CONFLICT, PLEASE
NOTATE THAT ON THE FORM AND RETURN WITH THE BID PROPOSAL.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 37 of 50

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 38 of 50

EXHIBIT B - Insert System for Award Management (SAM) Record Search for Company Name
and Company Principal(s) OR Provide Certification Form Below
(Actual SAM’s record/registration must be provided prior to award )
(Supplied by Proposal Responder/Bidder i.e., Vendor;)
FEDERAL DEBARMENT/SUSPENSION STATUS CERTIFICATION
COMPANY/ENTITY NAME:
CONTACT NAME:
CONTACT EMAIL & PHONE:
APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
As stated in the ARPA / SLFRF Terms & Conditions: “OMB Guidelines to Agencies on Governmentwide
Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement), 2 C.F.R. Part 180, including the requirement to include a term or
condition in all lower tier covered transactions (contracts and subcontracts described in 2 C.F.R. Part 180, subpart
B) that the award is subject to 2 C.F.R. Part 180 and Treasury’s implementing regulation at 31 C.F.R. Part 19.”
Also, Federal Executive Order (E.O.) 12549: “Debarment” requires that contractors, beneficiaries
or subrecipient organizations and their principals – who are receiving awards, using federal funds, are
not debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded by any Federal
department or agency from doing business with the Federal Government. By signing this document you certify
that your organization and its principals are not debarred. Failure to comply or attempts to edit this language may
disqualify you from receiving or retaining funds. Information on debarment is available at the following website:
www.sam.gov
Be advised that we may pursue available remedies per 2 CFR 180.360 as an ARPA Recipient entity: “If
a Federal agency later determines that you failed to tell the [awarding agency] that you were excluded
or disqualified at the time you entered into the covered transaction with that person[/awarding agency], the
agency may pursue any available remedies, including suspension and debarment.”

(Initial)

Certification & Signature
We hereby certify that we are not excluded, disqualified, or debarred from
receiving federally-funded awards.
We hereby confirm that if that status should change within the course of
this agreement, we will provide notification immediately. Failure to do so may result
in the termination of this agreement and/or the repayment of funds.

Your signature certifies that neither you nor your principal(s) is presently debarred, suspended, proposed for
debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from participation in this transaction by any federal
department or agency.
___________________________________
Signature
Date:

Printed Name & Title:

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 39 of 50

EXHIBIT C - Certification Regarding Lobbying
The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
(a)
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the undersigned, to any
person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an agency, a Member of Congress, an
officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any
Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any
cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
(b)
If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for
influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant,
loan, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form
to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with its instructions.
(c)
The undersigned shall require that the language paragraph 1 and 2 of this anti-lobbying certification be
included in the award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients shall certify and disclose accordingly.
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was
made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction
imposed by 31, U.S.C. § 1352 (as amended by the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995).
The Contractor, ___________________, certifies or affirms the truthfulness and accuracy of each statement of its
certification and disclosure, if any. In addition, the Contractor understands and agrees that the provisions of 31
U.S.C. § 3801 et seq., apply to this certification and disclosure, if any.

_____________________________________
Signature of Contractor’s Authorized Official
________________________________________________
Printed Name and Title of Contractor’s Authorized Official
___________________________________

Date

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 40 of 50

EXHIBIT D – Disclosure of Lobbying Activities
Instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of
information. Send comments regarding the burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions
for reducing this burden, to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0348-0046), Washington, DC 20503

Approved by OMB
0348-0046

Disclosure of Lobbying Activities
Complete this form to disclose lobbying activities pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1352
(See reverse for public burden disclosure)
Type of Federal Action:
a. contract
____ b. grant
c. cooperative agreement
d. loan
e. loan guarantee
f. loan insurance

Status of Federal Action:
a. bid/offer/application
_____ b. initial award
c. post-award

Report Type:
a. initial filing
_____ b. material
change

Name and Address of Reporting Entity:
____ Prime
_____ Subawardee
Tier______, if Known:

If Reporting Entity in No. 4 is Subawardee,
Enter Name and Address of Prime:

Congressional District, if known:
Federal Department/Agency:

Congressional District, if known:
7. Federal Program Name/Description:

Federal Action Number, if known:

CFDA Number, if applicable:
__________________
9. Award Amount, if known:

10. a. Name and Address of Lobbying Registrant
(if individual, last name, first name, MI):

11. Information requested through this form is authorized
by title 31 U.S.C. section 1352. This disclosure of lobbying
activities is a material representation of fact upon which
reliance was placed by the tier above when this
transaction was made or entered into. This disclosure is
required pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1352. This information will
be reported to the Congress semi-annually and will be
available for public inspection. Any person who fails to file
the required disclosure shall be subject to a civil penalty
of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for
each such failure.
Federal Use Only

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

$
b. Individuals Performing Services
(including address if different from No. 10a)
(last name, first name, MI):

Signature:__________________________
Print Name: _______________________
Title: ______________________________
Telephone No.: ____________ Date:
_______

Authorized for Local Reproduction
Standard Form - LLL (Rev. 7-97)

Page 41 of 50

SCOPE OF WORK
Purpose
The purpose of this Request for Proposal (RFP), released by Leon County, Texas, (County), is to
solicit sealed proposals from qualified vendors (Proposers) to provide broadband expansion services
within Leon County, to meet residents, anchor institutions, and business needs for broadband
connectivity throughout the county. The County considers modern broadband infrastructure to be a
critical component for economic competition and seeks to make sure Leon County is well-positioned
to meet the current and future needs of its residents, businesses, and anchor institutions. Leon County
has recently participated in the Texas Broadband Development Office’s Technical Assistance Program
and has taken a proactive approach to solving broadband access disparity within the county. This
request for proposal does not constitute a contract for services to be performed.
The County is seeking qualified broadband infrastructure and internet service providers to participate
in a Public-Private Partnership for the upcoming Texas Broadband Development Office Broadband
Equity, Access and Deployment Program (BEAD) to address the unserved and underserved locations
determined through mapping and analysis to enhance broadband access throughout the county. All
costs for the network including match required, engineering, reviews and design will be covered by
the proposer. While the proposer is expected to include all project costs in their application (including
match and capital), construction is contingent upon successful award of BEAD funds. The County
does not require financial outlay until funds are secured. The partnership agreement shall not create
any financial obligation or commitment of funds by the County. No County funding will be provided or
exchanged under this agreement.
The purpose of this RFP is to obtain innovative and/or traditional broadband internet solutions from
one or more proposers that are proposing one (or multiple) solutions over all or portions of Leon
County. From the RFP responses, the County will select a proposer(s) to finalize project details
through creation and development of a partnership arrangement with the County. The proposer shall
detail the ability to design, build, install, own, operate, and manage the network.
With the Texas BEAD program opening in during Summer 2025, the intent of this RFP is not to
overextend providers who are already applying for BEAD funding to serve the area but to combine
efforts to bring broadband access to Leon County.
The County reserves the right, in its sole discretion, after evaluation of all responsive proposals or
qualification statements, to award the work described herein to more than one responsive bidder,
proposer, or respondent.
Scope of Services
Leon County has spearheaded a county-wide effort to procure partners through this RFP to apply for
the BEAD program issued through the Texas Broadband Development Office (“BDO”) to address the
included list of Unserved and Underserved locations (CSV Excel Sheet) attached. The County is
seeking qualified broadband infrastructure and Internet service providers to participate in a partnership
to address the accessibility needs and connectivity gaps that have been identified to enhance the
availability of broadband within Leon County.
Leon County intends to provide a variety of forms of support, which may consist of:
1) Streamlining access to infrastructure, rights-of-way and inspections where
possible;
2) Long-term support for the development of high bandwidth applications to drive
adoption;
3) Collaborate with local research and educational networks; and
RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 42 of 50

4) Drafting letters of support to be included in the grant application for Texas BDO’s
BEAD Program.
The selected proposer(s) will provide vertically integrated retail services. However, the proposer must
not limit the ability of customers to run applications, use services and connect devices of their choice
to the network.
The proposer(s) will bear all of the costs for the network, including but not limited to design,
engineering, construction, equipment and insurance for the Network, up to the end user drop point or
network interface device. In addition, the proposer(s) will bear all the operating and maintenance costs
of the Network. The proposer should also demonstrate a clear upgrade path for the Network to meet
future consumer demand and service development needs.
The County intends for the Network to serve as a development platform for innovation, next generation
application development, workforce development, and job creation throughout the service area.
The County requests proposer(s) to submit qualifications to build, manage, and operate a next
generation communications network (“Network”) that will provide internet access to businesses,
anchor institutions, homes, and community institutions within the service area. A baseline of 1 Gbps
symmetric service will serve as the definition of “next generation” service for this RFP and is preferred
but not required.
Leon County seeks to make available a reliable and affordable high-speed broadband internet service
to as many premises in the County as possible, specifically targeting unserved and underserved
locations as defined by the Texas BEAD Program. Unserved locations are those lacking access to
reliable broadband with speeds of at least 25 Mbps download and 3 Mbps upload, while underserved
locations are those lacking access to reliable service with speeds of at least 100 Mbps download and
20 Mbps upload, each with latency at or below 100 milliseconds. The County intends to prioritize
connections that reliably deliver symmetrical speeds of 100 Mbps download and 100 Mbps upload
where practicable, or at a minimum, services designed to deliver at least 100 Mbps download and 20
Mbps upload, scalable to symmetrical 100/100 Mbps performance. This approach aligns with BEAD
requirements and applicable federal guidance under 31 C.F.R. § 35.6(e)(2), 86 Fed. Reg. 26786,
26823.
The objectives are to establish a network that:
a) Offers retail broadband speeds that meet the minimum Federal Broadband Equity, Access,
and Deployment (BEAD) Programmatic requirements of 100 Mbps download/ 100 Mbps
upload, with preference given to a service with a guaranteed minimum 1 Gbps dedicated
symmetrical transmission speed over each connection provided to a premise;
b) Supports high-quality voice, data and video services;
c) Uses fiber-to-the-premise network architecture where feasible;
d) Provides affordable options for household and business internet service;
e) Makes the network operational on a progressive, demand-driven basis, over 5 years, from the
date of execution of a contract between Leon County and the proposer(s);
f) Promotes the long-term economic and community interest of Leon County and end users; and
g) Facilitates opportunities for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and local enterprises to
provide services to the community.
Leon County does not intend to enter the broadband internet business as a competitive service
provider.
Leon County will not operate the network or network facilities it supports through this RFP response.
The County will select the best proposer(s) to finalize project details by development and execution of
a partnership agreement.
RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 43 of 50

Proposer(s) shall detail the ability to design, build, install, own, operate and manage the network. The
networks shall have the following features and functionality.
Network Equipment, Design, and Technical Specifications.
The proposer(s) must provide architecture documentation that shows active equipment locations and
where assets will be added.
Network architecture should consider a redundant topology that provides resiliency in the network.
While not every component of the network can be redundant, where feasible, the proposer(s) should
take steps to make service offerings as resilient as possible.
It is expected that Proposer(s) may have some preexisting core assets (fiber, towers, hut sites, etc.)
they intend to utilize in providing services to the proposed service areas. Proposers utilizing preexisting infrastructure should describe how these assets fit into their proposed network architecture.
Network Deployment Timing
Leon County desires that all project(s) be completed within 48 months from award, preferably sooner, or by
the negotiated date of the contract. Within their RFP response, proposer(s) shall provide a schedule for
implementation that reflects the most expeditious timeline possible, including engineering, permitting,
licensing, construction, and validation.
In preparation for funding applications, proposer(s) should expect that upon successful completion of a
negotiated contract for deployment of a rural broadband Internet network, commencement of work will begin
after/if funding for the project is received.
Presence in County
The successful proposer(s) will receive a letter of intent from Leon County acknowledging selection for
partnership development, contingent upon further agreement and funding success. The proposer(s) will be
contributing significant capital and operation assets and shall demonstrate they can successfully deliver
broadband Internet where the network is required to offer service. A significant component of the scoring
criteria will be the assessment of the proposer’s presence within the county, demonstrating its ability to
provide adequate service and support to its customers.
Network Construction Standards
In preparation for funding applications, proposer(s) should expect that upon successful completion of a
negotiated contract for deployment of a rural broadband Internet network, commencement of work will begin
after/if funding for the project is received.
The selected proposer(s) will fully engineer and permit the project prior to commencement of construction as
a function of the negotiated agreement.
Deployment of all fiber and fiber-related infrastructure must comply with all National Electrical and
Communications Association (NECA) codes and laws at the local, state, federal, and private land levels as
they pertain to fiber optic installations.
Should wireless technology be selected for deployment, all towers, antennas, and other components utilized
to deliver wireless broadband Internet must comply with all FCC regulations regarding tower construction,
spectrum registration, and applicable state/county authority over zoning and land use regulations. All newly
constructed towers shall become the property of the proposer(s); however, the county reserves the right to attach
signal capability for Central Dispatch. This right will expire after 2 years if unused. No fees may be charged to
the County for Central Dispatch use if selected.
RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 44 of 50

Proposer(s) will be expected to have all routes and tower sites surveyed by a licensed surveyor as well as
provide Leon County with GIS/CAD mapping showing the locations of all facilities deployed and service areas
of engineered coverage design(s).
Other construction requirements that are the responsibility of the proposer(s) include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Providing Leon County and its vendors with periodic reports of monthly activities and progression
towards milestones.
Coordinating all activities with the appropriate Leon County Precinct Commissioner where work is
being performed.
Working with all appropriate agencies to obtain all required right of way approvals.
Obtaining all required permits and private easement approvals.
Obtaining any and all environmental approvals and historical preservation agency approvals.
Coordinating project deployment with all utilities.
Obtaining any necessary vendor licensing issued by Leon County within the region where the
work will be completed.
Providing on-site construction inspections to ensure design.
Coordinating and resolving third party or private claims.
Repairing any and all damages to private property.
At all times, maintaining an adequate staff of experienced and qualified employees for efficient
performance. At all times, furnishing or performing any services in a safe, proper, and professional
manner.

Attachments
CSV File- showing BEAD eligible Leon County locations.
.XLSX File- showing BEAD eligible Leon County locations.
Png File- A map visually representing the locations in Leon County that are BEAD eligible.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 45 of 50

Proposer(s) Qualifications
1. Experience in high-speed network design and operations
Proposer(s) should provide a statement of experience highlighting [at least 3] similar network systems they
have designed, constructed and operated, including project name, location, size, technology deployed, and
phone number for reference contacts. Additionally, specify whether each system is owned by the proposer(s)
or another entity.
2. Financial Stability
Proposer(s) shall submit its two most recent annual audited financial statements for assessment of its
financial resources. If financial statements are unavailable for a recently closed year, please submit a current
unaudited financial in addition to the two prior audited financials. Due to confidentiality reasons, submission
of a recent Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) statement is permitted.
If a proposer(s) is a part of a team, the two most recent annual financial statements for each team member
should be submitted. If the proposal includes proposer(s) financing or committed bank or other financing, the
two most recent annual financial statements of such equipment vendors and financial institutions be
submitted.
3. Staff Technical and Managerial Experience
Proposer(s) shall include a statement of experience and resumes of the project team, including the project
manager and other key personnel who will be assigned to this project. Additionally, please include a list of
any known or anticipated subcontractors, along with a description of their roles and responsibilities.
4. Evidence of Legal Capacity
Proposer(s) shall include copies of the more recent federal and state annual reports and current licenses to
provide telecom/communications services, together with a certification that all Texas business and regulatory
registrations/filings/taxes are current, and all internal corporate documents are kept and up to date (e.g.
meeting minutes, bylaws, etc.)
5. Permits and Responsibilities
The Proposer(s) shall, without expense to Leon County, be responsible for obtaining any necessary licenses
and permits and complying with any federal, state, and municipal laws, codes, and regulations applicable to
the work's performance. The proposer(s) shall also be responsible for all damage to persons or property that
occurs as a result of the proposer(s)’s fault or negligence. The proposer(s) shall also be responsible for all
materials delivered and work performed until completion and acceptance of the entire work, except for any
completed unit of work which may have been accepted under the contract.
6. Inspection and Acceptance
The proposer(s) shall only tender for acceptance those items that conform to the requirements of this
Contract. The county reserves the right to inspect or test any supplies or services that have been tendered
for acceptance and may require repair or replacement of nonconforming supplies or re-performance of
nonconforming services at no increase in contract price. Leon County must exercise its post-acceptance
rights -- (1) Within a reasonable time after the defect was discovered or should have been discovered; and
(2) Before any substantial change occurs in the condition of the item, unless the change is due to the defect
in the item.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 46 of 50

Evaluation Criteria
This proposal will be evaluated by an evaluation committee. An evaluation committee will consist of
representatives of the County, technical advisors, and may include independent subject matter experts.
The committee members will individually evaluate and numerically score each submission in accordance with
the evaluation criteria section of this Solicitation. Submissions will be assessed on a 100-point scale. An award
resulting from this solicitation shall be awarded to the most responsive and responsible respondent whose
proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to Leon County; taking into consideration best value,
which includes price, delivery time, proposers past performance, etc.; moreover, the right is reserved to reject
any and all submissions received in all cases.
Name of Respondent:

RFP: Broadband Expansion Partnership

Evaluators Name:

Date of Evaluation:

Technical Evaluation
1. Proposed Cost Per Location

Maximum Score
Points
20

2. Affordability of Offering

20

3. Proposed Solution and Functionality

10

4. Knowledge, team, and technical
competence
5. Qualifications, Experience, and
Performance History
6. Overall Deployment Timing- Priority given to
projects done quickly
7. Proposed locations included that are
un/underserved (must provide list of
locations in spreadsheet format)
8. Financial Capacity

10

9. County Preference
Subtotal

Comments

10
10
10
5
5
100

1. Proposed Cost Per Location
Evaluation will consider the reasonableness and completeness of the total price schedule including
proposed cost per location. Proposers should demonstrate the ability to deliver goods/services at a
reasonable cost per location and provide all elements of cost details. The cost narrative clearly reflects the
cost for providing the goods/services, is sufficiently detailed, and includes all costs required for successful
project completion.
2. Affordability of Offering
Submission of summary of service offerings network-wide will be reviewed and compared between
proposer(s). Full points will be awarded to the most competitive service offering for a similar speed when
compared to other proposers.
RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 47 of 50

3. Proposed Solution and Functionality
Evaluation of the proposed solution specifically highlighting the specifications, functionality, and
compatibility in regard to the overall need. The proposed high-speed broadband services shall specifically
provide a service designed to reliably meet or exceed a speed of 100 Mbps download and 20 Mbps upload.
Any service incapable of providing these speeds will receive zero points. Full points will be awarded to a
service provider with a guaranteed minimum 1 Gbps dedicated symmetrical transmission speed over each
connection to a premise.
4. Knowledge, team, and technical competence
Acceptable overall qualifications of company and key personnel as demonstrated in detailed narrative,
resumes or bios and qualifications statement. Proposer(s) must show satisfactory evidence of ability to
manage and coordinate the types of activities described in this Solicitation and to produce the specified
products or services on time. Evidence is provided of the availability and commitment of the firm and its
principal(s) and key professionals to undertake the project.
5. Qualifications, Experience, and Performance History
Proposer(s) must provide a statement of experience highlighting [at least 3] similar network systems that it
has designed, constructed and operated, including project name, location, size, technology used, and name
and phone number for reference contacts. Proposers should indicate whether each system is owned by the
proposer or another entity.
6. Overall Deployment timing
Proposer(s) shall provide an estimated schedule for implementation that reflects the most expeditious
timeline possible, including engineering, permitting, licensing, construction, and validation. Leon County
intends the project to be planned and deployed continuously starting once broadband funding is awarded.
The County desires that all Rural Internet Connectivity Project(s) be completed within 48 months, preferably
sooner, or by the negotiated date of the contract. Projects not meeting this timeline will produce zero points.
7. Proposed Locations included that are un/underserved
Submission must clearly describe proposed project location(s) and demonstrate coverage of the project
locations within the specified area(s). Proposers must clearly state how many premises and types
(residential, business, anchor institutions) will be covered and at what level of service. The highest score will
be awarded to the proposer(s) who proposes to serve the most locations within the county. These locations
must be submitted in an xlsx or csv file format.
8. Financial Capacity
The submission must clearly demonstrate the proposer’s financial capacity to complete deployment and
maintenance of the selected project area by including the proposer(s)’s two most recent annual audited
financial statements for assessment of its financial resources. If the current completed year cannot be
submitted as audited, then inclusion of unaudited financials for the most recent year and two-audited years
are included. If a proposer(s) is a part of a team, the two most recent annual financial statements for each
team member should be submitted. If the proposer(s)’s response includes financing or committed bank or
other financing, the two most recent annual financial statements of such equipment vendors and financial
institutions should be submitted.
9. County Preference
The County reserves the right to add additional points based on various factors that are deemed important
to the county including factors such as employees, locations within the county, and additional items.

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 48 of 50

Schedule of RFP Events
Note: All dates are tentative, and Entity reserves the right to change these dates at any time. At the sole discretion of the
Entity events listed in the Schedule of Events are subject to scheduling changes and cancellation. The Entity will make
public any changes to stated.

EVENT

DATE/TIME

Solicitation Release Date

June 11, 2025

Deadline for Submitting Questions

June 25, 2025, at 4:00 p.m. Central Time

Deadline for submission of Solicitation Responses
[NOTE: Responses must be RECEIVED by the
County by the deadline.]
Evaluation Period

July 9, 2025, at 3:00 p.m. Central Time

Anticipated Notice of Intent

July 21, 2025

Anticipated Contract Start Date

TBD

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

July 9, 2025- July 16, 2025

Page 49 of 50

SIGNATURE PAGE
As permitted under Article 4413 (32c) V.A.C.S., other governmental entities may wish to participate under
the same terms and conditions contained in this contract (i.e., piggyback). In the event any other entity
participates, all purchase orders will be issued directly from and shipped directly to the entity requiring
supplies/services. Leon County shall not be held responsible for any orders placed, deliveries made or
payment for supplies/services ordered by another entity. Each entity reserves the right to determine their
participation in this contract.
Would bidder be willing to allow other governmental entities to piggyback off this contract, if awarded, under
the same terms and conditions? .......................................Yes No
This bid shall remain in effect for ninety (90) days from bid opening and shall be exclusive of federal excise
and state and local sales tax (exempt).
The undersigned agrees, if this Proposal is accepted, to furnish any and all items upon which prices are
offered, at the price and upon the terms and conditions contained in the Request for Proposal, Conditions of
Proposing, Terms of Contract, and Specifications and all other items made a part of the accepted contract.
The undersigned affirms that they are duly authorized to execute the contract, that this company, corporation,
firm, partnership, or individual has not prepared this bid in collusion with any other bidder, and that the
contents of this bid as to prices, terms, or conditions of said bid have not been communicated by the
undersigned nor by any employee or agent to any other bidder or to any other person(s) engaged in this type
of business prior to the official opening of this bid. And further, that neither the bidder nor their employees nor
agents have been for the past six (6) months directly nor indirectly concerned in any pool or agreement or
combination to control the price of goods or services on, nor to influence any person to bid or not to bid
thereon.

Bidder (Entity Name)

Signature

Street & Mailing Address

Print Name

City, State & Zip

Date Signed

Telephone Number

Fax Number

E-mail Address

RFP 2025-335 Broadband Expansion Partnership

Page 50 of 50

